| PETR, 
[ oo DHI 


NATHURA M€ GODSE 


a E e L a S 


Ban for the publication of the ERNS A a l DHA 
Nathuram Godse fo the Special. Court was pe ny ih i> 
x ithe Bombay High Court in 4968 ae 


ye ee ee 


WHY I 
ASSASSINATED 
CAND 


NATHURAM GODSE e GOPAL GODSE 


Compiled and Edited by 
Virender Mehra 


E 


Farsight Publishers and Distributors 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


My life also came to an end simultaneously 
with the shots fired by me.at Gandhiji, Since 
then I have been passing my days as if in 
trance and meditation. 


I am prepared to concede that Gandhiji did 
undergo sufferings for the sake of the nation. 
I shall bow in respect to-the-service and to 
him. But even this servant of the country had 
no right to vivisect the country by deceiving 
the people. 


I do not desire any mercy to be shown to me. 
I do not also wish that any one on my behalf 
should beg mercy towards me. 


If devotion to one's own country.amounts to 
a'sin, I admit I have committed that sin. If it is 
meritorious, I humbly claim the merit thereof. 


My confidence about the moral side of my 
action has not been shaken even by the 
criticism levelled against it on all sides. [have 
no doubt that honest writers of history will 


weigh my act and find the true value thereof 
some day in future. 


Db Tr TA Go-oten 


November 1948 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Editor’s Note 


In the late Nineteen seventies | came across the book ‘Murder 
of the Mahatma and other cases from a Judge’s Note Book’ 
written by Justice G.D. Khosla. He was one of the three judges 
who pronounced death sentence to Nathu Ram Godse. It was a 
fascinating narrative of a Judge who had interrogated the main 
accused to find out his real motive and had witnessed the 
reaction of the audience. According to him if the audience of 
the day were entrusted with the task of deciding: Godse’s 
appeal, they would have brought in a verdict of not guilty by an 
overwhelming majority. Such was his powerful defence, that he Y 
moved all the audience in his favour. 


= 


The Government of the day banned his last-statement. Even in 
the year 2014 Prasar Bharti Board withdrew the 52 serial 
programme on Mahatma Gandhi, produced by Ketan Mehta 
and Deepa Sahi on the pretext.of ‘time constraints’; fearing the 
sympathy Godse might get. To stage the play ‘Me Nathram 
Godse Boltoy’ the writer Pradeep Dalvi had to approach the 
High Court. The ban on staging the play was lifted in the year 
2001. Banning or hiding the portions of history is no solution. 


After having read Nathu Ram Godse’s Statement reproduced by 
his brother Gopal Godse, | felt the need to compile Gopal 
Godse’s work with Justice Khosla’s Narrative. | collected the 
Photographs of all the accused and the persons related with this 
: case to give the readers a comprehensive picture. 


‘lam sure this book will captivate the interest of the readers 


who are keen to know the ugly chapter of the history, which 
cannot be erased. ; 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ISBN : 81-89297-97-X 

© Gopal Godse 

Revised Edition 2015 
Low Price Edition : 7 150.00 


Book published : Arrangement with Surya Bharti Parkashan, 
Nai Sarak, Delhi - 119006 


All right reserved. No part of this publication may be copied, 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any from 
or by any means without specific prior permission of the publisher. 


Published by 
Farsight Publisher and Distributors 


S-16, Naveen Shahdara 
Delhi-110032 Phone : 22324833 
e-mail : goelbooks@rediffmail.com 


Laser Typesetted by 
Akriti Graphics 
Delhi, India 
Printed by 


B.K. Offset 
Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110032 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Preface 


Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, came on the Indian 
political scene about 1915 and dominated the same till 
the evening of 30.1.1948 when the three bullets fired by 
Nathuram Vinayak Godse put an end to his life. Nathuram 
Godse surrendered to the authorities. 


At the famous Red Fort trial, in Delhi, on 8.11.1948 
the special Court judge asked Nathuram, what he had to 
say with regard to the prosecution case against him. 
Nathuram Godse, made a detailed statement in his reply: ` 
It is this statement of his before the Court, that is here- 
with presented. 


There was a ban on the publication of his statement, 
and this had a peculiar background. Shri C.K. Daphtary - 
as the Chief Prosecutor, requested the Court not to allow 
the accused Nathuram Godse to read the statement that 
he had prepared and submit the explanation to the specific 
charges framed against him. This request was with a 
purpose. The sleuths of the prosecution had figured in 
advance that while confessing to the charge of 
assassination, Nathuram wanted to dig out and depose 
all commissions and omissions, promises and deceits, not 
of Gandhi alone but also of the ruling party, which he was 
going to put forward as the motive behind his act and 
thereby make the truth public through the process of the 
court, and this is what the prosecution wanted to halt in 
the beginning. The judge Shri Atma Charan counter 
questioned Shri Daphtary. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


How can I stop the accused from deposing? According 
to the accused it might be his pleading for justifiability of 
his act. Or, it might be the reason for denying the charges. 
Show me any authority or law, if you have in support of 
your objection. 

Shri Daphtary had to admit that he had no knowledge 
of such law or authority that he could cite. The Court 
overruled the objection and permitted Nathuram Godse 
to go on with the reading of his statement. 


The press carried portions of the statement the next 
day. Both the intelligent class and the masses which were 
kept in dark came to know of the stand of N athuram Godse. 
They also came to know that he had not denied the charge 
of assassinating Gandhiji. 

Pandit Nehru was the Prime Minister of India at that 
time. On his directions, State after State banned the 
publication of the statement, in part or in full. 


It may be noted at this juncture that the Government 
became more wise when Nathuram Godse completed his 
arguments before the High Court at Simla in June 1949. 
No sooner the judges returned to their chambers, 
the Police pounced on the press-reporters, snatched 
their note-books and tore them to pieces. They 
threatened the persons of true reporting. 


People the world over have been curious to know about 
the individuals connected with Gandhi Murder episode. 
What sort of men they were and of what ilk? is asked. 

There is a persistent demand for the publication of 
Nathuram Godse’s statement, which he had made in the 


Court. This is published in English, i.e. the language it 
was stated before the Court. 


Some writers of ‘repute’ have ventured on the subject. 
In doing so, they have distorted facts, substituted lies 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


instead of plain facts, indulged in innuendo, malicious in 
nature, and made dirty insinuations in their so-called. 
literary works. They have resorted to cheap sensationalism 
to pander to the mood of the readers and distort history. 

That apart, the authentic statement will clear the air 
of misgivings and meet dishonest versions given currency. 
to sully his image by some writers. The readers may make 
their own evaluation from the plain facts, the bald and 
bare statement. To quote Nathuram himself: “Honest 
writers of history will weigh my act and find the true value 
thereof some day in future.” 

Law gives a special kind of sanctity to ‘dying 
declarations.’ The statement of Nathuram Godse, in the 
circumstances in which it was made, commands itself to 
no less a sanctity. 


The author (Gopal Godse) is the younger brother of 
Nathuram Godse, and was also an accused in the Gandhi 
Murder Case. He was found guilty of conspiracy and was 
imprisoned for life. He was released from prison in October 
1964, but re-arrested a month later under Defence of India 
Act and kept in prison for over a year. He was finally 
released in the end of 1965. 


This book seeks to present the statement of Nathuram 
Vinayak Godse at the Red Fort trial in its unabridged form. 
Before that an introduction to the events, details of 
investigations and the formation of the special court are 
given. The proceedings after the statement was completed, 
the judgment, the appeals and events till 15.11.1949 when 
Nathuram and Apte were executed, are presented. 
Thereafter a profile of Nathuram Vinayak Godse and the 
other accused, as also the thoughts of the author, while 
serving the prison term are given. A few words about the 
later events only confirmed or whather there was any 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


discrepancy in the statement, coupled with the effect of 
application of Gandhian policies on the nation are given 
by way of an epilogue. A translation of Nathuram’s Will 
comes at the end. 


Nathuram Godse through his Will, bequeathed the 
right to publish the statement to Dattaraya, his younger 
brother, who in turn kindly passed on the right to the 
author, for which the author is grateful. 


The author acknowledges with thanks the help meted | 
out by the publishers in bringing out this book. 


September 19, 1993 (Gopal Godse) 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Contents 


1. The Events 


be 


arnaap wo 


. The Police Investigation 


The Arrests and The Special Court 


. Part -I : Answer to the Charge-Sheet 
. Part - II : Gandhi's Politics X-Rayed 
. Part - III : Gandhiji and Independence 


Part - IV : Frustration of an Ideal 


. Part - V : Climax of Anti-national Appeasement 


The Argument Before the Special Judge, 
Judgement and appeals to the High Court. 


. The Events After the High Court Judgement’ 


and till execution of the death sentence 


. Profile of Nathuram Godse 


and of The Other Accused 


. The Term in Prison 

. Life after Release l 
. Epilogue 

. From Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs* 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


11 


127 
134 


149 
176 
183 
185 
194 


Mahatama Gandhi was having close relations with 
Mountbatten and his wife Edwina 


Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BUP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


THE EVENTS 


Partition of India having been conceded,-on 15 August 
‘1947, the British rule came to an end and the two 
Dominions, —India (truncated) and Pakistan took shape. 
There was large scale migration of population with untold 
violence, murders, looting, rape and what not. The 
sufferings of the refugees in general and Hindus in 
particular presented a sorry sight, and here every action 
of Gandhiji was pro-Muslim and anti-Hindu. The 
integration of States was yet to take place. With Nizam of 
Hyderabad, the things were far from smooth and Kashmir 
was under attack. 


Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was then the Deputy Prime 
Minister of India. The payment of the cash balance of 
Rupees fifty five Crores due to Pakistan at the time of the 
partition of India was one of the major issues under. 
discussion and negotiations with Pakistan. The issue was 
inevitably linked with Pakistan’s aggression on Kashmir. 
In the statement made by Sardar Patel in the press 
conference on 12th January, 1948, he had put forward 
India’s case in unequivocal terms. He said: 


“We were therefore fully justified in providing against 
aggressive actions in regard to Kashmir by postponing the 
implementation of the agreement. The agreement does 
not bind the Government of India to any fixed date for 
payment. Pakistan would not be justified in any way in 
insisting on our paying the cash balances. I made it quite 
clear then that we would not agree to any payment until 
the Kashmir effair was settled.” 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


2r Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


(2 EE 

' Thus payment of Rupees fifty five Crores to Pakistan 
was sought to be withheld by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 
until the Kashmir issue was settled. 

There are two ways to extinguish fire: One is to throw 

water on it and the other is to cut off supply of substances 
that feed it. Our army was trying its level best to halt the 
invaders in Kashmir and drive them away. This strategy 
in financial transactions by the Government of India 
(withholding the payment) was valuable, for it was 
necessary to keep off material likely to serve as fuel from 
reaching the fire. In these circumstances, decision of the 
then Government of India to withhold payment of Rs. 55 
Crores until the Kashmir issue was settled was 
commendable. It was a far-sighted remedy to stop 
bloodshed immediately and establish peace. Two decades 
later, the march of the Indian army to Lahore to ward off 
the invasion of Pakistan on Kashmir under the guidance 
of Shastriji’s Prime Ministership was as timely as it was 
commendable. 


In those hectic days, Gandhiji was staying in Delhi. 
The high-ups in the Government of India used to meet 
him and discuss with him political issues. Gandhiji did 
not approve of this decision of the Government of India. 
Gandhiji felt that in blockading Pakistan in this way India 
was deviating from its path of Ahimsa. On 12.1.1948 
Gandhiji threatened the Government that unless they 
reversed their aforesaid decision and pay the money to 
Pakistan; he would go on hunger strike. A portion of 
Gandhiji’s sermon delivered on the 12th of January, 1948, 
that he had tried to persuade the Government of India to 
revoke this decision, but had failed. He said : 

“But a time comes when a worshipper of Ahimsa is 
forced to start fast in order to express his opposition to 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events %13 


the Evens — o o a a aa 
any injustice to the society. He does so because he being a 
worshipper of Ahimsa has no other course open to him. 
Such a critical moment has come for me.” 

Sardar Patel’s firmness must have forced Gandhiji to 
utter such despairing words. On the other hand, Sardar 
Patel did not like Gandhiji’s resolve to go on hunger strike. 
So has echoed Maulana Azad in his book. Sardar Patel 
left Delhi On 13.1.1948. Gandhiji began his fast. 


The net result of Gandhiji’s fast was that about the 
17th of January, the Government gave in and agreed to 
pay the money to Pakistan, thus bringing to an end Sardar 
Patel’s policy for Kashmir. 


The Government of India issued a press note (on or 
about 17th January 1948) which runs as follows: 


‘In view of the appeal made by Gandhiji to the nation 
the Government has decided to remove the cause of 
suspicion and friction between the two States which 
consistently with national honour and national interest, 
is in their power to remove. 


_ The government makes this spontaneous gesture in 
the earnest hope that it will help in producing an 
atmosphere of goodwill for which Gandhiji is suffering © 
crucifixion of the flesh and thereby lead this great servant 
of the nation to end his fast and add still further to his 
unparalleled services to India. 


The Government has decided to implement 
immediately the financial agreement with Pakistan in 
regard to cash balances.’ 

With all this overflowing generosity and goodwill from 


the Indian Government the Pakistani heart.did not melt. 
The Kashmir problem continued. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ar Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


Nathuram Vinayak Godse and Narayan Dattatraya 

` Apte were running a daily by the name of ‘Hindu Rashtra’, 
which earlier was ‘Agrani’ but now was in a new garb. 
Even prior to 15 August, 1947, the foreboding signs of the 
creation of a Muslim State, founded on communal principle 
on the very Indian soil were becoming clear every passing 
day. The editorials of this newspaper began to be more 
and more pungent and critical. There were even orders of 
forfeiture of the two security deposits of Rs. 3,000/- each. 


On seeing the news item on the teleprinter on 12th 
January, 1948, that Gandhiji was to start his fast, it 
became clear to Nathuram Godse that this act was 
contemplated to bring pressure on the Government of India 
to reverse their decision of withholding the payment of 
fifty-five crores of rupees. By that time his embittered 
feelings about Gandhiji and his continued anti-Hindu role 
reached its point of culmination. As soon as he read the 
news item on the teleprinter about Gandhiji’s fast, 
Nathuram must have thought that all other plans should 
be set aside. Care had to be taken to see that Gandhiji did 
not interfere with the democratic working of the 

Government. For that sake the task of assassinating 
Gandhiji should be taken up first and his everything should 
be staked for it. According to Nathuram it was a matter of 
life and death for the nation. 


On 20 January, 1948, a bomb had exploded at 
Gandhiji’s evening prayer near the prayer ground. Madan 
Lal Pahwa was apprehended on the spot. He was one of 
the Hindu sufferers of partition, The police got information 
that Madan Lal had other accomplices too in the plot, and 
their plan did not work and his co-conspirators must have 
fled. As a consequence, the Government reinforced the 
police force and Security measures at the Birla House. The 


Police spread a net all over India, to apprehend others. 
}CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events - *¥15 
The police could however make no progress in 
apprehending others within the next ten days. 

On 30.1.1948, at five past five in the evening, when 
Gandhiji, accompanied by a two young girls, was coming 
to the prayer ground, in the compound of Birla House, 
Nathuram Vinayak Godse fired three shots at point blank 
range. Gandhiji with a faint ‘ah’, possibly as a reflex action 
of muscles,. fell to the ground. He went unconscious 
instantaneously and breathed his last about twenty 
minutes later. Nathuram after firing shots raised his hand 
with the gun and called for the police. He voluntarily 
surrendered to the authorities. 


Nathuram Godse was fully aware that after the 
assassination of Gandhiji at his hands political powers of 
the day would append to him all sorts of attributes; such 
as fanatic, maniac, lunatic and many others. That is why 
he earnestly wished to be officially recorded by the 
concerned authorities at the very moment that he suffered 
from no such malady, mental or physical. That his mental 
state did not conform to any definition of mental distortion, 
disease or aberration. The request made by Nathuram to 
the doctor who was brought to examine him soon after his 
arrest following the assassination of Gandhiji was: 

Doctor, kindly examine me thoroughly and record 
faithfully if my pulse and heart are working normally. ~ 

The doctor did likewise and declared that his heart 
and pulse beat quite normally. 

After his surrender and arrest, Nathuram was kept 
før some time in the police lock-up at Tughlaq Road and 
‘thereafter he was taken to the police custody at Parliament 
Street. Along with the authorities some other people also 
came to have a look at him. Nathuram was pacing to and 
fro in the lock-up, but some times he stood near the bars. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


r — Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


Catching the sight of one individual he stood near the bars, 
and asked him : 

You are Shri Devadas Gandhi, I suppose. 

Yes, but how did you recognise me? 

was the counter-question by that individual. He had 
perhaps come there expecting to find some horrid-looking, 
blood-thirsty monster, without a trace of politeness. 
Nathuram’s gentle and clear words and his self-composure 
were quite inconsistent with what he had expected to see. 

We had gone together very recently at a press-conference. 
You'd gone there as the editor of The Hindustan Times. 

And You? 

I am Nathuram Vinayak Godse, the editor of a daily 
‘Hindu Rashtra’. I too was present there. Today you have 
lost your father I am the cause of that tragedy. I am very 
much grieved at the bereavement that has befallen on 
you and the rest of your family. Kindly believe me. I was 
not prompted to do this with any sort of personal hatred, 
or any grudge or with any evil intention towards you. 

Seeing that a man, the blood-stains on whose death- 
causing hands had not yet dried up, was talking to him in 
such a calm and balanced way and in a manner in which 
a third party may speak. Shri Devadas Gandhi’s curiosity 
was aroused. There was nothing unnatural, if he were to 
feel intense contempt for his father’s assassin. If he had 
that feeling, at least he did not show it then, and brushing 
aside for a moment his personal sorrow for his father’s 
demise, asked N: athuram, Then, why did you do it ? 

Nathuram replied, The reason is purely political and 
political alone. Would you listen to me for half an hour or 
80? Kindly ask for the officer’s permission. As you are an 
editor vou will soon understand the background.’ The police 
‘did not allow further discussion. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 
CUOL 


THE POLICE INVESTIGATION; 
The Arrests and The Special Court 


Nathuram Godse had surrendered to the Delhi Police 
on the spot. The enquiry started that very night. As long 
as Nathuram’s name was not disclosed people were making 
wild guesses. The refugees became restless, lest the 
assassin of Gandhiji might turn out to be one of them! 
Subsequently Nathuram’s name was disclosed and it was 
clear that he was neither a Punjabi, nor a Bengali, nora 
Sindhi nor even a refugee! Joy was openly expressed in 
cities like Amritsar, Ambala, Calcutta, Kanpur and others. 


Digamber Ramchandra Badge was arrested by the 
Pune Police on 31.1.1948 and later taken in their charge 
by the Bombay Police. ; 


Thousands of people all over the country were arrested 
under Preventive Detention laws. V.D. Savarkar was also 
one of them also. Later, and apparently for reasons stated 
in the chapter dealing with Savarkar, the arrest of 
Savarkar was converted from one under Preventive 
Detention Act into one as an accused in the Gandhi Murder 
case. 


Madan Lal Pahwa had already been arrested ten days 
before the assassination, at the time of bomb 
explosion on 20th January. He did not have anything to. 
add to the information, he had given to the investigation — 
relating there to. 


On Monday morning, i.e. on 2.2.1948 when I (Gopal 
Godse) took leave of my wife and left the house I had given 


her a fair idea of the possibility of my being arrested any 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


187 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


time. At that time I had set up my residence at Khadki, a 
suburb of Pune. On the 5th February 1948, I left Khadki 
for Kamshet. I got down at Kamshet and made for Uksan 
which was at a distance of ten miles from Kamshet. I had 
not covered half the distance when I saw the Police van 
following me. They took me in to their van. 


Shankar Kistaiyya, Badge’s servant walked into the 
C.I.D. Office, Bombay on 6.2.1948. The last persons to be 
arrested were Nana Apte and Karkare, who were arrested 
in Bombay by the Police on 13th and 14th of February, 
1948. Dr. Parchure of Gwalior was arrested and kept 
imprisoned in the Gwalior Fort itself 


On the 25th of May 1948 all of us who had been kept 
in the C.I.D. Office, Bombay, were taken to Delhi by plane 
in two batches. As Savarkar was not well on that day he 
was brought to Delhi next day ie. on the 26th of May 
1948 from the Arthur Road Prison. 


On 27th of May 1948 we were brought to the entrance 
of the specially made prison in the Red Fort and it was 
there, we all, including Savarkar and Dr. Parchure, saw 
one another. 


Badge had turned approver before the date fixed for 
next hearing. He did not sit in the dock thereafter 


In 1947, the Bombay Legislature passed a law, known 
as the Bombay Public Security Measures Act (Act IV of 
1947), with the provisions, such as the appointment of a 
special Court, the appointment of a single judge with the 
Powers to record, setting aside the usual procedure of 
preparing the charge-sheets and charges, to pronounce 
death sentence or the sentence of transportation for life, 
for the attempt to murder, to conduct the work of 
Prosecution promptly and continuously, to reduce the 
Period of appeal from 60 days to 15 days. This Act was 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Police Investigation “B19 


made applicable to Delhi as well in 1948 so far as this 
prosecution was concerned. 

From the murky, musty atmosphere of solitude we had 
come into open environment of the Court. It was 
27th of May 1948 and the time was half-past nine in the 
morning. The atmosphere in the Court was still more 
reliving. The Court-room was a hąll, admeasuring about 
a hundred feet in length and twenty-two feet in width, 
and was located on the first floor. 


The Gandhi assassination case had assumed as much 
importance and gravity as the actual incident of the 
assassination. One of the reasons for this was that the 
Government had implicated in this conspiracy no less a 
person than the internationally well-known Swantantrya- 
Veer Savarkar himself. Savarkar, who for the major part 
of his life had organised secret societies for the liberation 
of India from foreign bondage in and out of India. He, who 
endured incomparable hardships, harassment and torture 
in that attempt; who rekindled the flame of self-respect 
amongst the Hindus by propounding and propagating the 
political philosophy for the Hindu Nation. 


At 10 A.M., the Registrar of the Court announced the 
arrival of the Judge. The Photographers focused their 
cameras on the Judge and the dazzling flash lights glowed 
and flickered off one after another. Shri C.K. Daphtary 
stood up, saluted the judge and read out the charge-sheet 
against the accused and submitted it to the Court. 


The Court ordered the summaries of the statements of 
the witnesses to be given to the defence counsels by the 2nd 
June 1948. The Court would sit again on the 3rd June 1948. 
After returning from the Court, we arranged our luggage. 


As was decided earlier, the Prosecution supplied Shri 


Annarao Bhopatkar with a copy of the statements of the 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


a ; Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


witnesses. Although Shri Bhopatkar was pleading for 
Savarkar, he was entrusted the charge with overall 
guidance of the defence in general. Shri Ganpat Rai and 
Shri Jamnadas Mehta and other pleaders helped the other 
accused, besides their work for the defence of Savarkar, 


The Court framed the charges against us the accused 
on the 22nd June 1948. The Judge asked each of the 
accused if he accepted the charges to be true. We denied 
the charges. Madan Lal submitted a written statement 
while denying the charges, in which he said: 


‘I deny that there was ever any conspiracy to do any 
harm whatever to Mahatma Gandhior that I was involved 
in such conspiracy. The incident of 20th January 1948 
was meant only to demonstrate the widespread 
dissatisfaction in the country with the pro-Muslim policy 
and action which Gandhiji was advocating in those days. 
It was nothing more.’ 


While denying the charges, Dr. Parchure said that he 
was the resident of Gwalior. The State of Gwalior had not 
acceded to the Union Government of India by then. The 
Government of India had not issued the extradition 


warrant against Dr. Parchure before he was taken into 
its custody. 


Shri C.K. Daphtary, the Chief Public Prosecutor, 
opened the case and at the end of the day he requested 
the Court to visit the site of the incident. Nathuram 
declined. Apte, Karkare, Madan Lal and Gopal showed 
their desire to visit the spot, while Shankar Kistaiyya, 
Dr. Parchure and Savarkar said they were not interested. 
The visit was fixéd at 10 A.M. on the 24th June 1948. 

We were observing the, spot with a view to answer the 
statements, the Prosecutors might make in order to prove 


th : 
e charge they had levelled ARP Bhia Buéathat was a 


The Police Investigation “B21 


minor consideration with us, as our lawyers were more - 
competent. The thought, that we were very thickly 
connected with the background of the incident because of 
which that place had suddenly sprung into the limelight, 
was uppermost in our minds. 

That was a spot where a chapter of Indian history came 
to an end. Because it was a place where the life of one who 
had dominated for decades the political life of the Indian 
nation had ended. And again it was a place which made it 
imperative for others with peaceful disposition to stake their 
lives. It was a place where a society besmeared all over 
with blood as a consequence of the false notions of the Hindu- 
Muslim unity went to show Gandhiji their open gashes and 
the deep-rooted sorrow of their hearts and to tell him the 
harrowing tales of the thousands of victims of the Partition. 
That was a place where they expected their bleeding wounds 
to find a tongue strong enough to voice their unbearable ' 
affliction to the world. But, it was also a place, where the 
selfish sycophants gathered around Gandhiji and gave him 
the impression that his policy of non-violence was completely 
successful and that the political revolution had been brought 
about without even a drop of blood being shed. This was 
the same spot where Gandhiji assured Maulana Azad that 
the refugees from Pakistan who had sought shelter in India 
and housed in the houses of those Muslims who had left 
the country for their new home in Pakistan, should again 
be brought back. The Muslims who had left should be wooed 
to come back and their property be returned to them. This 
was the place where the fast to compel the Government to 
revert its decision of withholding the payment of fifty-five 
crores of rupees was undertaken. And lastly it was the place 
where the anti-Hindu policies emanated, and asit emerged 
in the years to come, were so conveniently adopted for selfish 
gains. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


2r Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


As we were surveying the place all this fresh history 

was unfolding itself before our eyes once again. This recent 
past did not appear to us as clear as it was made out to be, 
nor did it appear bloodless. We felt that the very 
atmosphere there was surcharged with blood, the blood of 
the martyrs who laid down their lives for the attainment 
of national freedom, the blood of the innocent victims of 
the inhuman atrocities committed due to the vivisection 
of the country. We also felt that as a natural concomitant 
to all this the blood of Gandhiji was lending a deepening 
dye to this ghastly atmosphere. And now perhaps as a 
culminating draught this hideous atmosphere was 
thirsting for the blood of at least some of us. 


All this blood that was shed and that was still to be 
shed, I thought was the price that we paid for the national 
independence won so dearly. His assassination was likely 
to demand the sacrifice of lives of some of us, accused. 
While saying that Swaraj was attained without any 
bloodshed, was a great insult—and sadly enough who do 
not realise it that the blood so profusely shed was of the 
millions of Hindus. In fact we are surrounded by the crafty 
selfish politicians and their sycophants, by dinning this 
falsehood into our ears day in and day out. 

The trial began and the prosecution commenced showing 
the evidence. The endeavor of the prosecution was to 
establish connections between the accused with one another 

during the period which they alleged when the conspiracy 
was hatched. Nathuram Godse and Narayan Apte were 
the editor and managing director respectively, of the daily 
Hindu Rashtra’. This fact was undisputed. The prosecution 
tried to prove that both of them travelled together to 
Bombay, Delhi and Gwalior. They further proved their 
stay at Marina Hotel, New Delhi between 17 January 1948 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Police Investigation B23 


to 20 January 1948 and at the railway station retiring 
room at Delhi Junction on 29th and 30th January 1948. 

The prosecution also alleged that Karkare, Gopal 
Godse, Madan Lal Pahwa, Digambar Badge and Shankar 
Kistatyya had gathered in the Marina Hotel on the 20 
January 1948. But for this allegation on part of the 
prosecution there was no other evidence than that of 
Digambar Badge, the approver. 


A witness from the Marina Hotel where Nathuram and 
Apte had stayed brought in their register to show the 
entries of Nathuram Godse and Narayan Apte under 
fictitious names. 


A taxi driver deposed that he took Nathuram Godse, 
Narayan Apte, Gopal Godse and Vishnu Karkare, 
Digamber Badge and Shankar Kistatyya to the Birla 
House on the evening of 20.1.1948 and also took three of 
them back to Connaught Place. 


The prosecution brought some witnesses against Dr. ‘ 
Parchure to prove that he was originally from British India, 
that is from that part of India which was not governed by 
the Princes. The prosecution wanted to establish that since 
Dr. Parchure belonged to British India, no extradition 
warrant was necessary. There was yet another point. 
There was no Arms Act existing in Gwalior State. Dr. 
Parchure could not be charged with an offence under the 
Arms Act if it were proved that he hailed from Gwalior; 
the State had not merged in the Union of India till the 
day in question. 

In order to show that the conspiracy continued even 
after 20th January 1948 till the goal of assassinating 
Gandhiji on 30th January 1948 was reached. The 
prosecution brought a witness from Thane (Maharashtra) 
to prove a meeting between Nathuram Godse, Narayan 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Ar ; Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


There was 
no legal 
machinery 
by which 
[Gandhi] 
could be 
brought to 


book... I felt 
that [he] 

should not 

be allowed 
to meet a 
natural 
death. 

-Naturam Godse 


Nathuram Godse 


Apte, Karkare and myself. A mere meeting however could 
not establish the existence of the conspiracy. 


The evidence against Veer Savarkar and his reply to 
the allegations has been narrated later. The Prosecution 
had brought as many as 149 witnesses. Their evidence 
ran into 720 pages. 


Then on 8.11.1948, it was the turn of the accused. 
Accused No. 1 was Nathuram Vinayak Godse. He desired 
to make a detailed statement. Shri C.K. Daphtary objected 
to the making-of any lengthy statement. The Special Judge 
overruled the objection and said: “Go on, make your 


statement.” And, began Nathuram Godse with the words 
that resounded. 


MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


PART-I 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet 


I, Nathuram Vinayak Godse, the first accused above 
named respectfully beg to state as under: 


1. Before I make my submission as regards the 
various charges I respectfully submit that the charges as 
framed are not according to law, in as much as there is a 
misjoinder of charges and there ought to have been two 
separate trials one relating to the incident of the 20th of 
January 1948 and the other relating to the incident of the 
30th of January 1948. The two having been mixed up 
together the whole trial is vitiated. 


2. Without prejudice to my above submission I make 
my submission in respect of the various charges as framed 
are stated hereafter. 


3. Inthe charge-sheet preferred against the accused, 
at number of counts it has been stated that each of the 
accused individually and jointly with others has been 
charged with the commission of the various offences 
punishable under the Indian Penal Code and other 
statutes. 


4. It appears from the charge sheet that the 
Prosecution takes the events that have happened on 20th 
January 1948 and thereafter on 30th January 1948 as 
one and the same or a chain of events in continuation of 
one and the same object culminating in the murder of 
Gandhiji. I therefore, wish to make it clear at the outset 
that the events upto 20th January 1948 are quite 
independent and have no connection whatsoever with what 
happened thereafter and on 30th January 1948. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


26 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


5. `The first and the foremost amongst the said 
charges is the charge of conspiracy amongst the accused 
to murder Gandhiji. I shall therefore first deal with the 
-game. I say that there was no conspiracy of any kind 
whatsoever amongst the accused to commit any of the 
offences mentioned in the charge-sheet. J may also state 
here that I have not abetted any of the other accused in 
the commission of the alleged offences. 


6. I say that the evidence led by the Prosecution in 
this regard does not establish and prove that there was 
any conspiracy whatsoever. The only witness who deposes 
about the alleged conspiracy is Digambar R. Badge 
(Prosecution Witness 57). He is a totally unreliable witness 
as will be proved Your Honour by my counsel when he 
explains the case and deals with the evidence of this 
witness - P.W.57. 


7. Asregards the charge of collecting and transporting 
arms and ammunition without licence, and abetment 
thereof on 20th January 1948, I say that I deny the said 
charge and say that I neither carried or transported gun- 
cotton slabs, hand-grenades, detonators, wicks, pistols, or 
revolvers and cartridges etc. as alleged. Nor did I have 
under my control any of such arms and/or ammunition, 
nor did I abet and aid any of the accused to do so, either 
before or on or about to 20th January 1948 or any other 
date. I deny therefore that I contravened any of the 

provisions of the Indian Arms Act or the Indian Explosives 
Substances Act and that I committed any offence 
punishable under the said Acts. 


. 8. The main evidence in regard to this charge is the 
evidence of Digambar R. Badge (P.W.57), but as stated in 
paragraph 6 above, he is a totally unreliable witness. This 
witness Badge (P.W.57), is known to me. He hardly came 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet “WY 27 


to me, nor have I ever visited his place of residence since 
several years. His statement that he came to the Hindu 
Rashtra Office on 10th January 1948, being brought there 
by Apte, the accused No. 2, is totally false and I deny that 
the said Badge saw me at the Hindu Rashtra Office or 
any other place on that day. Or that in my presence Apte 
and he had any talk between themselves about gun-cotton 
slabs, hand-grenades, etc. and about the delivery thereof 
at Bombay, as alleged by the said Badge. His statement 
that Apte asked me to come out of the room and that Apte 
told me to hand over the hand grenades etc. and that one 
work was over is totally false. This is a story got up by 
Badge to implicate me and others into the alleged 
conspiracy. I further say that I neither saw nor met Badge 
on 14th January 1948 at Dadar, either alone or in the ° 
company of Apte. I did not even know that Badge had 
come to Bombay on that day. ; 

9. Ifurther deny that I had in my possession or under 
my control, while at Delhi, or abetted any one to have and 
possess on 20th January 1948, any arms or ammunition 
as stated in the charge-sheet under the heading ‘Secondly’ 
paragraphs B(1) and (2). 

Here also the evidence to support this charge is of 
Badge alone and I say that he has given false evidence to 
save his own skin, on that condition alone, he could secure 
the pardon promised and granted to him. 

10. As regards the charge under the heading Thirdly’, I 
say that I deny the said charge and the abetment thereof as 
stated in several paragraphs A(1) and (2), and B(1) and (2). 

11. As regards the charge under the heading Fourthly’ 
paragraph 2; I deny that I abetted Madanlal K. Pahwa 
either myself alone or along with others to explode a gun- 
cotton slab on 20th January 1948 at Birla House, I say 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Br Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


that there is no evidence to substantiate this charge and 
whatever little evidence there may be, can hardly connect 
me with the explosion of the gun-cotton slab. 

12. As regards the charge of abetment in the attempt 
to commit the murder of Mahatma Gandhi under the 
heading Fifthly’in the charge sheet, I deny the said charge 
and say I had no connection either directly or indirectly 
with Madanlal K. Pahwa or any other person whatsoever. 
I further say that there is no evidence whatsoever to 
support this charge. 


13. As regards the charge under the heading ‘Sixthly’ 
in the charge-sheet as to paragraphs (A)(1) and (2) thereof, 
I say that I have not imported or brought unlicensed pistol 
and ammunition with the assistance of Narayan D. Apte. 
I also deny that Dr. Dattatraya S. Parchure and Narayan 
D. Apte procured the said pistol, or any one of them 
individually or jointly; abetted me or themselves to each 
other in procuration of the said pistol and the ammunition. 
I further say that the evidence produced by Prosecution 
in that behalf is not reliable. Without prejudice to the 
above, I further say that even if the acts mentioned in 
these paragraphs A(1) and (2) may have been committed, 

this Honourable Court has no jurisdiction to take any 
notice of them. I further say that so far as I am concerned 
the charge, if any, would merge under the charge in 

paragraph B(1) under this head. 


14 As regards the charge under paragraph B(1) and 
(2), I admit that I had in my possession automatic pistol 
No. 606824 and cartridges. But I say that neither Narayan 


D. Apte nor Vishnu R. Karkare had anything to do with 
the pistol in my possession. 


15. But before I pass to the charge under the heading 


‘Seventhly’, it will not be out of place to explain here how I 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet “3 29 


happened to come to Delhi, and why I came to Delhi. I 
have never made a secret about the fact that I supported 
the ideology or the school which was opposed to that of . 
Gandhiji. I firmly believed that the teachings of absolute 
‘Ahimsa’ as advocated by Gandhiji would ultimately result 
in the emasculation of the Hindu Community and thus 
make the community incapable of resisting the aggression 
or inroads of other communities especially the Muslims. 
To counteract this evil I resolved to enter public life and 
formed a group of persons who held similar views. In this 
Apte and myself took a leading part and as a part of 
propaganda started a daily newspaper ‘Agrani’. I may 
mention here that it was not so much the Gandhian 
‘Ahimsa’ teachings that were opposed by me and my group, 
but Gandhiji while advocating his views always showed 
or evinced a bias for Muslims, prejudicial and detrimental 
to the Hindu Community and its interests. I have fully 
described my point of view hereafter in detail and have 
quoted numerous instances which unmistakably establish 
how Gandhiji became responsible for a number of 
calamities which the Hindu Community had to suffer and 
undergo. 

16. In my paper ‘Agrani’ or ‘Hindu Rashtra’, I always 
strongly criticised Gandhiji’s views and his methods such 
as fast for achieving his object, and after Gandhiji started 
holding prayer meetings, we—Apte and myself—decided 
to stage peaceful demonstrations showing opposition. We 
had made such demonstrations at Panchagani, -Poona, 
Bombay and Delhi. There was a wide gulf between the 
two ideologies and it became wider and wider as 
concessions after concessions were being made to the 
Muslims, either at the suggestion or connivance of Gandhiji 
and the Congress which was guided by Gandhiji, 


culminating in the partition of the Country on 15th of 
CC. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


30 7 ' Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


“August 1947. I have dealt with this point in detail 
hereafter. On 13th of January 1948, I learnt that Gandhiji 
had decided to go on fast unto death. The reason given for 
such fast was that he wanted an assurance from Hindu- 
Muslim unity in Indian Dominion. But J and many others 
could easily see that the real motive behind the fast was 
not merely the so-called Hindu-Muslim unity, but to compel 
the Dominion Government to pay the sum of Rs. 55 crores 
to Pakistan, the payment of which was emphatically 

refused by the Government. As an answer to this, Apte 
suggested the same old method to stage a strong but 
peaceful demonstration at the prayer meetings of Gandhiji. 
I consented to this half-heartedly, because I could easily 

‘see its futility. However, I agreed to join him as no 
alternative plan was as yet fixed in my mind. It was for 
this reason that N.D. Apte and myself went to Bombay on 
the 14th January, 1948. 


17.On 15th January, 1948 we—Apte and myself— 
happened to go to the Hindu Sabha Office at Dadar in the 
morning..I happened to see Badge there. On seeing N.D. 
Apte and myself, Badge talked to N.D. Apte and asked 
him the reason of his coming to Bombay. Apte told him 
the reason. Badge thereupon of his own accord offered to 
come to Delhi and join in the demonstration, if we had no 
objection to his coming there. We wanted men to back us 
and to shout slogans and we therefore accepted his offer. 
We asked him as to when we could start. Badge thereupon 
told Apte that he had to give some stuff to Pravin Chandra 


„Sethia. That he would do so in a day or two and would see 
, uson the 17th January, 1948. 


_ 18. We had met Badge on 15th January, 1948 at the 
Hindu Sabha Office at Dadar, thereafter I met Badge on 
the 17th of January, 1948 in the morning. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet B31 


19. The statements made by Badge about our going to 
Dixitji Maharaj along with him and seeing Dixitji Maharaj, 
about Apte having told Badge that Savarkar had entrusted 
Apte and myself the task of finishing Gandhiji, Pandit 
Jawaharlal and Surhawardy is a pure concoction and 
product of Badge’s brain. Neither Apte nor I have ever 
said anything like this to Badge or any other person. 


I deny categorically what the Prosecution has falsely 
maintained that I was guided in my action by Veer 
Savarkar and that, but for his complicity, I could never 
have acted in the way I have done. I take the strongest 
exception to this untrue and unjust charge and I further 
regard it as an insult to my intelligence and judgment. 
The prosecution’s attempt to make out that I was a mere 
tool in someone else’s hands is an aspersion which is far 
from truth. Indeed it is a perversion of it. 


20. Badge’s statements to the effect that I wanted to 
go to Poona to meet my brother Gopal Godse who had 
undertaken to make arrangements for procuring a revolver 
and bring him down to Bombay for accompanying us to 
Delhi, is also untrue. I had no talk with Badge when I met 
him on 15th January 1948 except what is stated in 
paragraph 17 above. Further the statement of Badge that 
he met me on 16th January 1948 at Poona is also false. 
The alleged report of my conversation with him at Poona 
as deposed by Badge in his evidence is also false and 
untrue. I was not in Poona on the 16th January 1948. It 
will be clear from this that it is not true that I gave him 


any pistol on that day for getting it exchanged for a big 
revolver. 


21. I have already stated that we—Apte and myself— 
had planned to stage a strong but peaceful demonstration 
at Gandhiji’s prayer-meeting at the earliest possible 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


32 ¥° Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


opportunity at Delhi, and for that purpose Apte and myself 
were to go there. As stated in paragraph 17, Badge offered 
to come to Delhi to take part in the demonstration 

mentioned above. We felt an urgent need for taking some 
- volunteers with us for a successful demonstration. Before 

we started for Delhi we started collecting money to meet 

the expenses for the journey and the expenses of the 
_ volunteers. 

22. I emphatically deny that we saw Savarkar on the 
17th January, 1948 or that Savarkar blessed us with the 
words Yashasvi Houn Ya,’ (Be successful and come), 
Similarly I also deny that we had any conversation with 
Badge or that Apte or myself uttered the words— 
‘Tatyaravani ase Bhavishya kele ahe ki Gandhijichi 
Shambhar Varshe bharali—ata apale kam nishchita honor 
yat kahi sanshaya nahi.’ After we met Badge on 15th 
January, 1948 at the Hindu Sabha Office at Dadar, we— 
Apte and myself—went on our business in connection with 
the Press. 


23. Apte and myself came to Delhi by plane on the 17th 

of January, 1948 and we stayed at Marina Hotel. On the 

morning of 20th January, 1948 Badge came to the hotel 

and informed Apte in my presence that he and his servant 

Kistaiya would go to the prayer-ground in the evening 
with Apte just to see the scene of prayer where 
demonstrations would be held. When Badge came in the 
morning I was lying down on the bed as I was feeling 
unwell owing to severe headache and I told Badge that I 
may not be able to go to the prayer-ground as I was unwell. 
The statements of Badge that Apte, Gopal Godse, Karkare, 
Madanlal, Badge and his servant Shankar all collected at 
Marina Hotel. That Shankar and Badge had their meals/ 
there. That Gopal Godse was found repairing the revolver. 
That Apte, Karkare, Madanlal and Badge went to the bath- 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet E33 
CONST 10 Me ynargoroneet ES 


room and were fixing the detonators, fuse-wires and 
primers to the gun-cotton slabs and hand-grenades or that 
Shankar and I were standing at-the either side of the door 
of the room are entirely false. Badge has put in my mouth 
the words ‘Badge, this is our last effort—the work must be 
accomplished—see to it that every thing is arranged 
properly.’ I deny that I addressed the said or similar words 
to Badge on that day or any other day. As stated before, 
Badge came to the room in the morning and informed me 
that he would attend the prayer-meeting in the evening. 
We had no meeting at all on that day in my room as stated 
by Badge. Gopal Godse, to my knowledge, was not even in 
Delhi. Nobody arranged or fixed detonators fuse-wires or 
primers to gun-cotton slabs or hand-grenades in the room. 
In fact there was no such ammunition either with me or 
with Apte. Badge’s vivid description about the distribution 
of arms and ammunition amongst the party and about 
assumption of false names is all false. It is not necessary 
for me to discuss the evidence and show the falsity of these 
statements as my counsel will do it in his address. 


24. As stated above, being unwell due to severe 
headache, I did not even go to the prayer-ground. Apte 
returned to Marina Hotel at about 6.00 p.m. and informed 
me that he had a view of the prayer meeting and would be 
in a position to stage the demonstration in a day or two. 
After about an hour, we heard some commotion at 
Gandhiji’s prayer meeting due to an explosion and we 
further heard of an arrest, of a refugee. Apte thought it 
advisable to leave Delhi immediately and we left: 
accordingly. It is not true that I met Badge at Hindu Sabha 
Bhavan on 20th January 1948. Several witnesses have 
deposed about my being at the Birla House on the 20th 
January, 1948. But I emphatically say that they are 
grossly mistaken in saying so. I submit that they are 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


F r Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


confusing my presence with somebody else’s. The 
identification by some of these witnesses is utterly 
unreliable in view of the fact that I had not been to the 
Birla House on that day. These witnesses have identified 
me as I was shown to many of them by the Police while I 
was kept at the Tuglak Road Police Station. Further, it 
was easy to identify me on account of the bandage over 
my head which remained up to the 12th of February 1948. 
The Police witnesses who have deposed, have perjured 
themselves and I have made complaint at the very first 
identification parade in respect of the Delhi witnesses held 
in Bombay about this. 
25. After a deliberate consideration of our future plan 
of staging the demonstration at Delhi in the prayer- 
meeting of Gandhiji. I very reluctantly consented to join 
Mr. Apte. It was not possible to get willing and able 
volunteers from Bombay and Poona under the new 
situation. Besides all our funds were exhausted and we 
were not in a position to spend for the batch of volunteers 
from Bombay to Delhi and back. We, therefore, decided to 
proceed to Gwalior and see Dr. Parchure who had under 
him the volunteers of Hindu Rashtra Sena. It was also a 
more or less an economical plan to take volunteers from 
Gwalior to Delhi. We therefore started for Gwalior, by the 
night train reaching Gwalior very early morning. As it 
was dark at that time we halted in a Dharamshala near 
the Station and in the morning we saw Dr. Parchure at 
his residence. He was ina hurry to go to his dispensary. 
He asked us to see him in the afternoon. We met him at 
about 4 p.m. and found that he did not wish to help us, as 
his volunteers were busy in local affairs. Completely 
disappointed I asked Apte to go back to Bombay or Poona 
and try for volunteers there. I came back to Delhi after 
telling Apte that I would myself try for volunteers from 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet “B35 


amongst the refugees. I deny categorically and with all 
the emphasis at my command that Mr. Apte and myself 
had been to Gwalior to secure a revolver or a pistol, as 
number of such revolvers were being offered for sale 
clandestinely. Having reached Delhi in great despair, I - 
visited the refugee camps at Delhi. While moving in the 
camps my thoughts took a definite and final turn. By 
chance, I came across a refugee who was dealing in arms 
and he showed me the pistol. I was tempted to have it and 
I bought it from him. It is the same pistol which I later 
used in the shots I fired. On coming to the Delhi Railway 
Station I spent the night of the 29th thinking and re- 
thinking about my resolve to end the present chaos and 
further destruction of the Hindus. I shall now deal in detail 
about my relations with Veer Savarkar in political and 
other matters of which the prosecution has made so much. 


26. Born in devotional Brahmin family, I instinctively 
came to revere Hindu religion, Hindu history and its 
culture. I had been intensely proud of Hinduism as a whole. 
Nevertheless as I grew up I developed a tendency to free 
thinking unfettered by any superstitious allegiance to any 
‘ism’, political or religious. That is why I worked actively 
for the eradication of untouchability and the caste system 
based on the birth alone. I publicly joined anti-caste 
movements and maintained that all Hindus should be 
treated with equal status as to rights—social and religious, 
and should be high or low on their merit alone and not 
through the accident of birth in a particular caste or 
profession. I used publicly to take part in organised anti- ` 
caste dinners in which thousands of Hindus, Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Chamars and Bhangis broke the 
caste rules and dined in the company of each other. 


27.1 have read the works of Dadabhai Naoroji, © 


Vivekanand, Gokhale, Tilak along with the books on 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ee oe 


r Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


ancient and modern history of India and some prominent 
countries of the world like England, France, America anq 
Russia. Not only that, I studied tolerably well the current 
tenets of Socialism and Communism too. But above all] 
have studied very closely whatever Veer Savarkar and 
Gandhiji have written and spoken. As to my mind, these 
two ideologies have contributed more to mould the thought 
and action of modern India during the last fifty years or 
so, than any other single factor has done. 


28. All this reading and thinking brought me to believe 
that above all it was my first duty to serve the Hinduism 
and the Hindu people, as a patriot and even as a 
humanitarian act. For, is it not true that to secure the 
freedom and safeguard the just interests of some thirty 
crores of Hindus constituted the freedom and the just 
interests and the well-being of one fifth of human race? 
This conviction led me naturally to devote myself to the 
new Hindu Sanghatanist ideology and program which 
alone I came to believe, could win and preserve the national 
independence of Hindustan, my Motherland and enable 
her to render true service to humanity as well. 


29.I have worked for several years in R.S.S. and 
subsequently joined the Hindu Mahasabha and 
volunteered myself to fight as a soldier under its pan-Hindu 
flag. About this time Veer Savarkar was elected to the 
Presidentship of the Hindu Mahasabha. The Hindu 
Sanghatan movement got verily electrified and vivified 
as never before, under his magnetic lead and whirl-wind 
propaganda. Millions of Hindu Sanghatanists looked uP 
to him as the chosen hero, as the ablest and most faithful 
advocate of Hindu cause. I too was one of them. I worked 
devotedly to carry on the Mahasabha activities and hene 
came to be personally acquainted with Savarkarji. 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet _ 37 


30. Later on my friend and co-worker in the Hindu 
cause, Mr. Apte and myself decided to start a daily paper 
devoted to Hindu Sanghatan Movement. We met a number 
of prominent Hindu Sanghatanist leaders and after 
securing sympathy and financial help from them met Veer 
Savarkar as the President of the Mahasabha. He too_ 
sympathised with our project and advanced a sum of rupees 
fifteen thousand as his quota to the capital required, on 
condition that a limited company should be registered at 
our earliest convenience, and his advance should be 
transformed into number of shares. 


31. Accordingly, we started the daily Marathi paper 
‘Daily Agrani’ and after some period a limited company ` 
was registered. The sums advanced by Veer Savarkar and 
others were converted into shares of Rs. 500/--each. 
Amongst the directors and donors were such leading and 
respected gentlemen as Seth Gulab Chand (a brother of 
Shriman Seth Walchand Hirachandji), Mr. Shingre, an ex- 
Minrster of Bhor, Shreeman Bhalji Pendharkar — the film 
magnate of Kolhapur and others. Mr. Apte and myself were 
the Managing Directors of the Company. I was the editor 
solely responsible for the policy of the paper. We conducted 
the paper for years on strictly constitutional lines, and 
pleaded the policy of Hindu Sanghatan in general. 


32. As press representatives of this daily, Mr. Apte and 
myself used to visit the Hindu Sanghatan office situated 
at Veer Savarkar’s House in the middle hall of the ground 
floor of that house. This Hindu Sanghatan office was in 
the charge of Mr. G.V. Damle, the Secretary to Veer’ ~ 
Savarkar. Mr. Appa Kasar was Veer Savarkar’s body 
guard. We used to visit this office to secure from Mr. Damle, 
the Secretary, public statements issued by Veer Savarkar 
for the press in general; to note down other important 
information about the President’s tours, interviews etc. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


sor : Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


which his Secretary was authorised to publish. Mr. AS. 
Bhide, who used to edit an English weekly namely ‘Free 
Hindustan’ was also residing with his family as a tenant 
in a set of rooms on the same ground-floor. The second 
reason why Mr. Apte and I used to visit Savarkar Sadan 
was to see Messrs Bhide, Damle, Kasar and other Hindu 
Sabha workers who used to gather at the Hindy 
Sanghatan office and had been personal friends to each 
other. Whenever we went to Bombay, we used to go to 
this office to meet all of them and have friendly chats. 
Sometimes we used to discuss the Hindu Sanghatan work 
with them. Some of them used to help us in securing 
advertisements for our paper. 


Thus deprived of his virile leadership and magnetic 
influence, the activities and influence of the Hindu 
Mahasabha too’ got crippled. And when Dr. Mookerjee 


the efficiency of the policy ofrunning the Hindu Sanghatan 
movement on the constitutional lines of the Mahasabha 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet “B39 


and began to shift for myself. I determined to organise a 
youthful band of Hindu Sanghatanists and adopt a fighting 
program both against the Congress and the League 
without consulting any of those prominent but old leaders 
of the Mahasabha. 

35. I shall just mention here a few instances only, out 
of a number of them which painfully opened my eyes about 
this time to the fact that Veer Savarkar and other old 
leaders of Mahasabha could no longer be relied upon by 
me and the Hindu youths, to guide or even to appreciate 

- the fighting program with which we aimed to counteract 
Gandhiji’s activities from inside and the Muslim League 
from outside. In 1946 or thereabout the Muslim atrocities 
perpetrated on the Hindus under the Government 
patronage of Suhrawardy in Noakhali, made our blood 
boil. Our shame and indignation knew no bounds, when 
we saw that Gandhiji had come forward to shield that 
very Suhrawardy and began to style him as ‘Shahid 
Saheb—a Martyr Soul (!) even in his prayer meetings. 
Not only that even after coming to Delhi, Gandhiji began 
to hold his prayer meetings in a Hindu temple in Bhangi 
Colony and persisted in reading passages from Quoran as 
a part of the prayer in that Hindu temple in spite of the 
protest of the Hindu worshippers there. Of course, he dared 
not read the Geeta in a mosque in the teeth of Muslim 
opposition. He knew what a terrible Muslim reaction would 
have been if he had done so. But he could safely trample 
over the feelings of the tolerant Hindus. To belie this belief, 
I determined to prove to Gandhiji that the Hindu too could 
be intolerant when his honour was insulted. 

36. Mr. Apte and I decided to stage a series of 
demonstrations in Delhi during his meetings and make it 
impossible for him to hold such prayers. Mr. Apte with a 
large section of the refugees took out a procession in Delhi 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


D.. 


40" Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


condemning Gandhiji and his Shahid Suhrawardy and 
rushed into his prayer-meeting in the Bhangi Colony, 
Seeing the tumultuous protest that followed, Gandhiji slyly 
took shelter behind barred and guarded doors although 
at that time we had noi the slightest idea of using any 
force. 

37. But when Veer Savarkar read the report of this 
demonstration, instead of appreciating our-move, he called 
me and blamed me privately for such anarchical tactics, 
even though this demonstration was peaceful. He said: 


Just as I condemn the Congressites for breaking up your 
party meetings and election booths by disorderly conduct, 
TI ought to condemn any such undemocratic conduct on the 
part of Hindu Sanghatanist also. If Gandhiji preached anti- 
Hindu teachings in his prayer meeting you should hold 
your party meetings and condemn his teachings. Amongst 
ourselves all different parties should conduct their 
propaganda on strictly constitutional lines. 
- 88. The second leading incident took place just after 
this, when the partition of India was actually decided on. 
A group of Hindu Mahasabhaites wanted to know what 


the Hindu Mahasabha’s attitude should be with regard to E 


the Congress Government which was certain to be the 
Government of the New State, ruling over the so-called 
Indian State in the remaining part of India. Veer Savarkar 
and other top-ranking Hindu Mahasabha leaders quickly 
and emphatically said that any Indian Government formed 
to conduct such a freed Indian State should no longer be 
looked upon as a Government of a party—a Congress 
Government; but must be Honoured and obeyed as a 
National Government of Hindustan. Howsoever they 
deplored the creation of Pakistan. Their future motto was 
to be loyal and all-out support to the newly born Free 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet 41 


Indian State. Thus alone in their opinion, would it be 
possible to safeguard the newly won Freedom. Any attempt 
to undermine the Indian State would bring in a Civil War 
and enable the Muslims to realise their sinful and secret 
mission to turn whole of India into Pakistan. 


39. Me and my friends however returned unconvinced. 
We felt in our heart of hearts that time had come when 
we should bid good-bye to Veer Savarkar’s lead and cease 
to consult him in our future policy and program. Nor should. - 
we confide to him our future plans. 


40. Just after that, followed the terrible outburst of ` 
Muslim fanaticism in Punjab and other parts of India. 
The Congress Government began to persecute, prosecute, 
and shoot the Hindus themselves who dared to resist the 
Muslim forces in Bihar, Calcutta, Punjab and other places. 
Our worst fears seemed to be coming true; and yet how 
painful and disgraceful it was for us to find that the 15th 
of August 1947 was celebrated with illumination and 
festivities, while the whole of the Punjab was set by the 
Muslims in flames and Hindu blood ran in rivers. The 
Hindu Mahasabhaites on my persuasion decided to boycott 
the festivities of the Congressite Government and to launch 
a fighting program to check the Muslim onslaughts. 


41.The meeting of the Working Committee of the 
Hindu Mahasabha and the All-India Hindu Convention 
were held on or about 9th and 10th of August 1947, in 
Delhi, and Veer Savarkar presided. Mr. Apte and other 
friends and myself wanted to make a last effort to bring 
the Mahasabha and its veteran leaders like Veer Savarkar, 
Dr. Mookerjee, Mr. L.B. Bhopatkar and others to our views 
and to adopt a fighting resolution. The Mahasabha 
Working Committee did not accept our suggestion to 
appoint a council of action against Hyderabad or boycott 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 
ee 


F Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


the Congress Government which was to run the newly 
created Stale of Divided India. To my mind to recognise a 
State of Divided India was tantamount to be a party to 
the cursed vivisection of India. The Working Committee 
passed a frothy resolution and asked the people to hoist 
the Bhagwa Flag on their houses on the day of August 
15th, 1947. Veer Savarkar went further and actually 
insisted that the tri-colour flag with the wheel should be 
recognised as a National Flag. We openly resented his 
attitude. ibs 
42. Not only that on the 15th August, Veer Savarkar 
setting aside the will of the majority of Hindu 
Sanghatanists hoisted this new flag with the wheel, as a 
National Flag, on his house along with the Bhagwa. In 
addition to that when Dr. Mookerji asked his permission 
through a trunk call to Veer Savarkar as to whether Dr. 
Mookerji should accept a portfolio in the Indian Union 
Ministry. Veer Savarkar emphatically replied that the new 
Government must be recognised as a National Government 
and must be supported by all patriots and consequently 
Hindu Sanghatanists ought to extend their co-operation 
by accepting a portfolio if called upon to do so. He also 
congratulated the Congressite Ministers for the 
compromising attitude they were taking in calling on a 
Hindu Sabha leader like Dr. Mookerji to participate in 
the forming of National Ministry. Mr. Bhopatkar too 
supported Dr. Mookerji. 


43. By this time it came to light that some top leaders 
of the Congress and some of their Provincial Ministers too 
had contacted Veer Savarkar and there was a brisk 
correspondence between them for forming a united front 
to support the new State, which policy Veer Savarkar had 
already advocated. I myself, could not be opposed to a 
common front of patriots, but while the Congress 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet “¥ 43 


Government continued to be sheepishly under the thumb 
of Gandhiji, while Gandhiji could thrust his anti-Hindu 
fads on the Congressite Government by restoring to such 
a simple trick as threatening a fast, it was clear to me 
that any common front under such circumstances was 
bound to be another form of setting up Gandhiji’s 
Dictatorship and consequently a betrayal of Hindudom. 

44. Every one of these steps taken by Veer Savarkar 
was so deeply resented by me that I, alongwith Mr. Apte 
and some of the young Hindu Sanghatanist friends decided 
once for all to chalk and work out our active program quite 
independently of the Mahasabha or its old veteran leaders. 
We resolved not to confide any of our new plans toʻany of 
them including Veer Savarkar. 


45. I began to criticise the Hindu Maha Sabha and the 
policy of its old leaders in my daily paper ‘Agran? or ‘Hindu 
Rashtra’ and openly called upon the young generation of 
Hindu Sanghatanists to accept our own active program. 


46. In order to work out my new independent program 

I decided to undertake two definite items in hand to begin 
with. The first item was to organise a series of powerful 
though peaceful demonstrations against Gandhiji so as to 
make him feel the impact of organised Hindu discontent, 
and to create confusion and disorder by demonstrative 
protests, etc. in his obnoxious prayer-meetings through 
which he carried out his anti-Hindu propaganda; and 
secondly to carry on an agitation against the Hyderabad 
-State to defend our Hindu brothers and sisters near about 
the frontier line from the fanatic atrocities committed on 
them by the Muslims. As such a program could only be 
carried out on secret and dictatorial lines we resolved to 
divulge it only to those who believed in it and would obey 
our orders without questioning. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 
ee 


“ar j Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


eee 
47.1 would not have referred to the above details in 
this statement but for the learned prosecutor's opening 
speech in which he painted me as a mere tool in the hands 
of Veer Savarkar. This statement I felt to be a deliberate 
insult to my independence of judgment and action. The 
above facts had to be mentioned to dispel the incorrect 
impression about me, if any. Consequently, before I begin 
to narrate the rest of my statement, I re-assert that it is 
not true that Veer Savarkar had any knowledge of my 
activities which ultimately led me to fire shots at Gandhiji, 
I repeat that it is not true and it is totally false that either 
Mr. Apte in my presence or I myself told Badge that Veer 
Savarkar had given us an order to finish Gandhiji, Nehru 
and Suhrawardy as the approver is made to state falsely. 
It is not true that we ever took Badge to Veer Savarkar’s 
house to take the last Darshan of Veer Savarkar in 
connection with any such plot or that Veer Savarkar ever 
said to us: Yashasvi houn ya’ [Be successful and come 
back]. Neither Mr. Apte in my presence nor I myself ever 
told Badge that Veer Savarkar told us that Gandhiji’s 
hundred years were over and therefore we were bound to 
be successful. I was neither so superstitious as to crave 
for such blessings, nor so childish as to believe in such 
fortune-telling. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Answer to the Charge-Sheet “3 45 


The news that Gandhi had decided to go on a fast to force India to 
transfer Rs 55 crores to Pakistan, was being broadcast over the news 
media in all languages. Pandit Nathuram Vinayak Godse and 
Narayan Dattatray Apte — the editor and manager of the ‘Marathi 
Daily’, the ‘Hindu Rashtra’, were sitting in their office and reading 
it on their teleprinter when they suddenly made their decision — 
‘Gandhi has to be killed’. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 
E. 


PART-II 
GANDHIJI’S POLITICS X-RAYED 


SECTION I 


48. The back-ground to the event of 30th January, 1948 
was wholly and exclusively political and I would like to 
explain it at some length. The fact that Gandhiji honoured 
the religious books of Hindus, Muslims and others or that 
he used to recite during his prayers verses from the Geeta, 
the Quoran and the Bible never provoked any ill will in 
me towards him. To my mind it is not at all objectionable 
to study comparative religion. Indeed it is a merit. 

49.The territory bounded by the North Western 
Frontier in North and Cape Comorin in the South and the 
areas between Karachi and Assam that is the whole of 
pre-partition India has always been to me, my motherland. 
In this vast area, live people of various faiths and T hold 
that these creeds should have full and equal freedom for 
following their ideals and beliefs. In this area the Hindus 
are the most numerous of the lot. They have no place which 

they can call their own beyond or outside this country. 
Hindusthan is thus both the motherland and the holy land 
for the Hindus from times immemorial. The Hindus owe 
its fame and glory, its culture and art, knowledge of science 
and philosophy largely to this country. Next to the Hindus 
the Muslims are numerically predominant. They made 
systematic inroads into this country since the 10th century 
and gradually succeeded in establishing Muslim rule over ` 
the greater part of India. 


50. Before the advent of the British both Hindus and 
Muslims as a result of centuries of experience had come to 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed ; 47 


realise that the Muslims could not remain as masters in 
India; nor could they be driven away here. Both had clearly 
understood that both had to stay here. Owing to the rise 
of the Maharattas, the revolt of the Rajputs and the uprise 
of the Sikhs, the Muslim hold on the country had become 
very feeble and although some of them continued to aspire 
for supremacy in India, practical people could see clearly 
that such hopes were futile. On the other hand the British 
had proved more powerful in battle and intrigue than 
either the Hindus or the Muslims. By their adoption of 
improved methods of administration and the assurance of 
the security to the life and property without any 
discrimination to both the Hindus and the Muslims, they 
accepted them as inevitable. Differences between Hindus 
and Muslims did exist even before the British came. 
Nevertheless it is a fact that the British made the most 
unscrupulous use of these differences and created more 
differences in order to maintain their power and authority. 
The Indian National Congress which was started with the 
object of winning power for the people in the governance 
of the country, had from the beginning kept before it the 
ideal of complete nationalism which implies that all 
Indians should enjoy equal rights and complete equality 
on the basis of democracy. This ideal of removing the 
foreign rule and replacing it by the democratic power and 
authority of the people appealed to me most from the very 
start of my public career. 


51.In my writings and speeches I have always 
advocated that the religious and communal consideration 
should be entirely eschewed in the public affairs of the 
country; at elections, inside and outside the legislatures 
and in the making and unmaking of Cabinets. I have 
throughout stood for a secular State with joint electorates. 
To my mind this is the only sensible thing to do. (Here I 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ar Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


read extracts from the resolutions passed at the Bilaspur 
Session of Hindu Mahasabha held in December, 1944. 
Annexure Pages 12 and 13). Under the influence of the 
Congress this ideal was steadily making headway amengst 
the Hindus. But the Muslims as a community first stood 
aloof and later on under the corroding influence of the 
Divide and Rule Policy of the foreign masters were 
encouraged to cherish the ambition of dominating the 
Hindus. The first indication of this outlook was the demand 
for separate electorates instigated by the then Viceroy, 
Lord Minto in 1906. The British Government accepted this 
demand under the excuse of minority protection. While 
the Congress Party offered a verbal opposition, it 
progressively supported separatism by ultimately adopting 
the notorious formula of neither accepting nor rejecting in 
1934.. 


52. Thus, originated and intensified, the demand for 
the disintegration of this country. What was the thin end 
of the wedge in the beginning became Pakistan in the end. 

The mistake however had begun with the laudable object 
of bringing out a united front amongst all classes in India 
in order to drive out the foreigners and it was hoped that 
separatism would eventually disappear. 


53. In spite of my advocacy of joint electorates in 
Principle I reconciled myself with the temporary 
introduction of Separate electorates since the Muslims were 
keen on them. | however insisted that representation 
should be granted in strict proportion to the number of 
every community and no more. I have uniformly 
maintained this stand. 


1154. Under the inspiration of our British masters on the 
one hand and the e 


Gandhiji ncouragement by the Congress under 
and 
nahiji's leadership on the other, the Muslim League 
oes Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji's Politics X-Rayed 49 


went on incréasing its demands on communal basis. The 
Muslim community continuously backed the Muslim 
League. Each successive election proved that the Muslim 
League was able to bank on the fanaticism and ignorance 
of the Muslim masses and the League was thus 
encouraged, in its policy of separatism on an ever 
increasing scale year after year, 


55. As I have stated before despite their objection to 
the principle of communal electorates, the unreasonable 
demands óf the Muslim League were conceded by the 
Congress. Firstly by the Lucknow Pact of 1916 and at each 
successive revision of the constitution thereafter. This 
lapse, from nationalism and democracy on the part of the 
Congress, has proved an expensive calamity as the sequel 
has shown. 


56. Since the year 1920, that is to say after the demise 
of Lokamanaya Tilak, Gandhiji’s influence in the Congress 
first increased and then became supreme. His activities 
for public awakening were phenomenal in their intensity 
and were reinforced by the slogan of truth and non-violence 
which he ostentatiously paraded before the country. No 
sensible or enlightened person could object to these slogans. 
In fact there is nothing new or original in them. They are 
implicit in every constitutional public movement. To 
imagine that the bulk of mankind is or can ever become 
capable of scrupulous adherence to these lofty principles 
in its normal life from day to day is a mere dream. In fact, 
honour, duty and love of one’s own kith and kin and country 
might often compel us to disregard non-violence and to 
use force. I could never conceive that an armed resistance 
to the aggressive is unjust. I will consider it is a religious 
and moral duty to resist, and if possible, to overpower such 
an enemy by the use of force. Shree Ramchandra killed 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Aaa Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


Ravan in a tumultuous fight and relieved Sita. Shree 
Krishna killed Kansa to end his wickedness. In the 
Mahabharat Arjun had to fight and slay, quite a number 
of his friends and relations including the revered Bhishma, 
because the latter was on the side of the aggressor. It is 
~ my firm belief that in dubbing Rama, Krishna and Arjuna 
as guilty of violence is to betray a total ignorance of the 
springs of human action. It was the heroic fight put up by 
the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj that first checked and 
eventually destroyed Muslim tyranny in India. It was 
absolutely correct tactics for Shivaji to kill Afzul Khan ag 
the latter would otherwise have surely killed him. In 
condemning Shivaji, Rana Pratap and Guru Govind as 
misguided patriots, Gandhiji has merely exposed his gelf- 
conceit. i 
57. Each of the heroes in his time resisted aggression 
on our country, protected the people against the atrocities 
and outrages by alien fanatics and won back the 
motherland from the invader. On the other hand during 
more than thirty years of the undisputed leadership of 
the Mahatma there were more desecration of temples, 
more forcible and fraudulent conversions, more outrages 
on women and finally the loss of one third of the country. 
It is therefore astounding that his followers cannot see 
what is clear even to the blind, viz. that the Mahatma 
was a mere pigmy before Shivaji, Rana Pratap and Guru 
Govind. His condemnation of these illustrious heroes was 
to say the least, most presumptuous. 


58. The clique which has got into power with the 
patronage of British imperialism by a cowardly surrender 

_ to the Partition of India at the point of Muslim violence is 
now trying to exploit Gandhiji’s death in hundred hectic 
ways for its own selfish aims. But history will give to them 
their proper place in the niche of fame. Gandhiji was, 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed “E51 


paradoxical as it may appear, a violent pacifist who brought 
untold calamities on the country in the name of truth and 
non-violence, while Rana Pratap, Shivaji and the Guru will 
remain enshrined in the hearts of their countrymen for ever 
and for the freedom they brought to them. 


59. As pointed out herein below Gandhiji’s political 
activities can be conveniently divided under three heads. 
He returned to India from England some time about the 
end of 1914 and plunged into the public life of the country 
almost immediately. Unfortunately soon after his arrival 
Sir Pherozeshah Mehta and Mr. G.K. Gokhale, the latter 
whom Gandhiji called his Guru, died within a short span 
of time. Gandhiji began his work by starting an Ashram 
in Ahmedabad on the banks of the Sabarmati river, and 
made Truth and nonviolence his slogans. He himself has 
admitted that he had often acted contrary to his professed 
principles and if it was for appeasing the Muslims, he 
hardly had any scruple in doing so. Truth and non-violence 
are most excellent as an ideal and admirable as guides in 
action. They are, however, to be practised in actual day- 
to-day life and not in the air. Iam showing later on that 
Gandhiji himself was guilty of glaring breaches of his much 
vaunted ideals. 

60. Gandhiji’s political career will be divided as already 
stated under three heads: 

G) The period between 1915 to 1939-40. 

(i) The period between 1939-40 to 3rd June, 1947, when 
the Indian National Congress surrendered to Mr. 
Jinnah and accepted Pakistan under the leadership 
of the Mahatma. 

(iii) The period between the date of partition to the day of 
his last fast unto death resulting in the payment of 
Rs. 55 crores to Pakistan and the Mahatama’s death 
within a short period. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


529 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


~ SL When Gandhiji finally returned to India at the end 
of 1914, he brought with him a very high, reputation for 
courageous leadership of Indians in South Africa. He had 
placed himself at the head of the struggle for the assertion 
and vindication of the national self-respect of India and for 
our rights of citizenship against white tyranny in that 
country. He was honoured and obeyed by Hindus, Muslims 
and Parsees alike and was universally acclaimed as the 
leader of all Indians in South Africa. His simplicity of life, 
his unselfish devotion to the cause which he had made his 
own, his self-sacrifice and earnestness in fighting against 
the racial arrogance of the Africanders had raised the 
prestige cf Indians. In India he had endeared himself to all. 


62. When he returned here to serve his countrymen in 
their struggle for freedom, he had legitimately hoped that 
as in Africa he would command the unchallenged confidence 
and respect of all communities. But in this hope he soon 
found himself disappointed. India was not South Africa. In 
South Africa, Indians had claimed nothing but elementary 
rights of citizenship which were denied to them. They had 
all a common and acute grievance. The Boer and the British 
both had treated them like door mats. Hindus, Muslims 
and Parsees therefore stood united like one man against 
the common enemy. They had no other quarrel with the 
South African Government. The Indian problem at home 
was quite different. We were fighting for home rule, self- 
government and even for Independence. We were intent on 
overthrowing an Imperial Power, which was firmly 
entrenched in the soil. It was determined to continue its 
sway over us, by all possible means including the policy of 
‘Divide and Rule’ which had intensified the cleavage 
between the Hindus and Muslims. Gandhiji was thus 
confronted at the very outset with a problem, the like of 
which he had never experienced in South Africa. In South 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ee a 


are mo or ee y e ee oo - 


Gandhiji's Politics X-Rayed 53 


Africa he had smooth sailing throughout. The identity of 
interest between the various communities there was 
complete and every Indian had ranged himself behind him. 
But in India communal franchise, separate electorates and 
the like had already undermined the solidarity of the nation, 
more of such happenings were in the offing and the sinister 
policy of communal favouritism was being pursued by the 
British with the utmost tenacity without any scruple. 
Gandhiji therefore, found it most difficult to obtain the 
unquestioned leadership of the Hindus and the Muslims in 
India as in South Africa. But he had been accustomed to be | 
the leader of all Indians and quite frankly, he could not 
understand the leadership of a divided country. It was 
absurd for his honest mind to think of accepting the general- . 
ship of an army divided against itself. 

63. For the first five years after his return to India 
there was not much scope for the attainment of supreme 
leadership in Indian politics by him. Dadabhai Naoroji, 
Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, Lokmanya Tilak and Mr. G.K. 
Gokhale and others were still alive and Gandhiji though 
honoured, and popular was, still a junior compared to those 
veterans both in age and experience. But an inexorable 
fate removed all of them in five years and with the death 
of Lokmanya Tilak in August, 1920 Gandhiji was at once 
thrown into the front line. 


64. He saw that the foreign rulers by the policy of 
‘Divide and Rule’ were corrupting the patriotism of the 
Muslims and there was little chance of his leading a united 
host to the battle for Freedom unless he was able to 
inculcate the feeling and common devotion to the 
Motherland in them. He, therefore, made Hindu-Muslim 
unity the foundation of his politics. As a counterblast to 
the British tactics he started making the most friendly 
approaches to the Muslim community and reinforced them 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


549° Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


by making generous and extravagant promises to the 
Muslims. This, of course, was not wrong in itself so long as, 
it was done consistently with India’s struggle for democratic 
national freedom. But Gandhiji completely forgot this, the 
most essential aspect of his campaign for unity, with the 
consequencies we all know by now. 

65. Our British rulers were able, to make concessions 
to Muslims continuously and the various communities 
divided. By 1919 Gandhiji had become desperate in hig 
endeavours to get the Muslims to trust him and went from 
one absurd promise to another. He promised ‘a blank 
cheque’ to the Muslims. He backed the Khilafat movement 
in ‘this country and was able to enlist the full support of 
the National Congress in that policy. For a time, Gandhiji 
appeared to succeed and the prominent Muslim leaders in 
India became his followers. Mr. Jinnah was nowhere in 
1920-21, and the Ali Brothers became de-facto Muslim 
leaders. Gandhiji welcomed this situation as he foresaw 
the promise of leadership of the Muslims. He made most 
of the Ali Brothers, raised them to the skies by flattery 
and unending concessions; but what he wanted, never 
happened. The Muslims ran the Khilafat Committee asa 
distinct politica] religious organisation and throughout 
maintained it as a Separate entity from the Congress; and 
very soon the Moplah Rebellion showed that the Muslims 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji's Politics X-Rayed “B55 


consequences were borne by the Hindus. But undaunted 
by the tactics of the British rulers, Gandhiji became more 
stubborn in the pursuit of his phantom task of Hindu- 
Muslim unity. By the Act of 1919 separate electorates were 
enlarged and communal representation was continued not 
merely in the legislature and the local bodies but was even 
extended within the Cabinet. The jobs began to be 
distributed on communal basis and the Muslims obtained 
high jobs from our British Masters not on merit but by 
remaining aloof from the struggle for freedom and because - 
of their being the followers of Islam. Government 
patronage to Muslims in the name of minority protection 
penetrated throughout the body-politic of the Indian State 
and the Mahatama’s meaningless slogans were no match 
against this wholesale corruption of the Muslim mind. But . 
Gandhiji did not relent. He still lived in the hope of 

becoming the common leader both of the Hindus and the 
Muslims. The more he got defeated, the more, he indulged 
in encouraging the Muslims by extravagant-methods. The 
position continued to deteriorate and by 1925 it became 
clear to all, that the Government had won all along the ~ 
line. Like the proverbial gambler Gandhiji increased his 
stake. He agreed to the separation of Sind and the creation 
of a separate province in the North-West Frontier. He also 
went on conceding to one undemocratic demand after 
another to the Muslim League in the vain hope of enlisting 
its support in the national struggle. By this time the stock 
of the Ali Brothers had gone down and Mr. Jinnah who 
had staged a come-back was having the best of both the 
worlds. Whatever concessions the Government and the 
Congress made, Mr. Jinnah accepted and asked for more. 
Separation of Sind from Bombay and the creation of the 
North-West Frontier province, were followed by the Round 
Table Conference in which the minority question loomed 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


er Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


large. Mr. Jinnah stood out against the federation until 
Gandhiji himself requested Mr. McDonald, the Labour 
Premier, to give the Communal Award. Further seeds were 
thereby sown for the disintegration of this country. The 
communal principle became deeply imbedded in the 
Reforms of 1935. Mr. Jinnah took the fullest advantage of 
every situation. The Federation of India which was to 
consolidate Indian Nationhood was in fact, defeated. Mr. 
Jinnah had never taken kindly to it. The Congress 
continued to support the Communal Award under the very 


hypocritical words of neither supporting nor opposing, 


which really meant its tactic acceptance. During the War, 
1939-44, Mr. Jinnah took up openly one stand,—a sort of 
benevolent neutrality—and promised to support the war 
as soon as the Muslim rights were conceded. In April 1940, 
within six months of the War, Mr. Jinnah came out with 
the demand for Pakistan on the basis of his two nation 
theory. Mr. Jinnah totally ignored the fact that there were 


' Hindus and Muslims in large numbers in every part of 


India. There may be a majority of Hindus in some case 
and Muslims in other Provinces and vice versa. There was 
no Province in India where either the Hindus or the 
Muslims were negligible in numbers. Any division of India 
would leave the minority question wholly unsolved. 


66. The British Government liked the Pakistan idea 
as it kept the Hindus and Muslims estranged during the 
war and thereby avoided embarrassing the Government. 
The Muslims did not obstruct the war efforts and the 
Congress sometimes remained neutral and some times 
opposed to it. On the other hand the Hindu Sabha realised 
that this was an opportunity for our young men to have a 
military training, which is absolutely essential for our 
nation, from which we were rather kept far away 
intentionally by the British. Due to this war, the doors of 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


OOOO O ST 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed 57 


Army, Navy and Air-force were opened to us, and 

Mahasabha urged our countrymen to militarise Hindus. 

The result was that nearly half a million Hindus learnt the 

art of warfare and mastered the mechanised aspect of 

modern warfare. The Congress Governments are enjoying 

the fruits of the Mahasabha’s foresight because the troops 

they are using in Kashmir and Hyderabad would not have 

been there ready but for the effort of men with such 

outlook. The Congress-in 1942, started the ‘Quit India’ 

movement in the name of Freedom. Violent outrages were 

perpetrated by Congress men in every Province. In the 

Province of North Bihar there was hardly a railway station 

which was not burnt or destroyed by the Congress non- 

cooperators. In spite of all the opposition of the Congress. 

The Germans were beaten in April, 1945 and the Japanese 

in August, 1945. The atomic bomb brought the collapse of 
the Japanese resistance and the British won against 

Japanese and Germans. In spite of the opposition of the 

Congress party, the “Quit India’ campaign of 1942 had 
completely failed. Britishers had triumphed and the 

Congress leaders decided to come to terms with them. 

Indeed in the subsequent years the Congress policy can 
be quite correctly described as ‘Peace at any Price’ and 
‘Congress in Office at all costs’. The: Congress compromised 
with the British who placed it in office and in return the 
Congress surrendered to the violence of Mr. Jinnah; carved 
out one-third of India to him, an explicitly racial and 
theological State and destroyed two million human beings 
in the process. Pandit Nehru now professes again and 
again that the Congress stands for a secular State and 
violently denounces those who reminded him that only 
last year he agreed to a communal and theological State. 
His vociferous adherence to a ‘Secular State’ is nothing 
but a case of ‘my lady protests too much.’ 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


58 F Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


_67. The ‘Quit India’ movement had to be abandoned. 
The Congress support to the war against Japan had to be 
assured and the Viceroy Lord Wavell had to be accepted 
as the head of the Government of India, before the 
Congress was to be called into the Conference Chamber. 


68. This section summarises the background of the 
agony of India’s partition and the tragedy of Gandhiji’s 
assassination. Neither the one nor the other gives me any 
pleasure to record or to remember, but the Indian people 
and the world at large ought to know the history of the 
last thirty years during which India has been torn-into 
pieces by the Imperialist policy of the British and under a 
mistaken policy of communal unity. The Mahatma was 
betrayed into action which has ultimately led not to the 
Hindu-Muslim unity, but to the shattering of the whole 
basis of that unity. Five crores Indian Muslims have ceased 
to be our countrymen; virtually the non-Muslim minority 
in Western Pakistan have been liquidated either by the 
most brutal murders or by a forced tragic removal from 
their moorings of centuries; the same process is furiously 
at work in Eastern Pakistan. One Hundred and ten 
millions of people have become torn from their homes of 
which not less than four millions are Muslims. When I 
found that even after such terrible results, Gandhiji 
continued to pursue the same policy of appeasement, my 


blood boiled, and I could not tolerate him any longer. I do~ 


not mean to use hard words against Gandhiji personally 
nor do I wish to conceal my utter dissent from the 
disapproval of the very foundation of his policy and 
methods. Gandhiji in fact succeeded in doing what the 
British always wanted to do in pursuance of their policy 
of ‘Divide and Rule’, He helped them in dividing India and 
it is not yet certain whether their rule has ceased. 
Gandhiji’s Politics X-rayed 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed “¥ 59 


SECTION II 


_69. The accumulating provocation of 32 years, 
culminating in his last pro-Muslim fast at last goaded me 
to the conclusion, that the existence of Gandhiji should be 
brought to an end immediately. On coming back to India 
he developed a subjective mentality under which he alone 
was to be the final judge of what was right or wrong. If 
the country wanted his leadership it had to accept his 
infallibility, if it did not, he would stand aloof from the 
Congress and carry on in his own way. Against such an 
attitude there can be no half way house; either the 
Congress had to surrender its will to his and had to be 
content with playing the second fiddle to all his eccentricity, 
whimsicality, metaphysics and primitive vision, or it had 
to carry on without him. He alone was the judge of every 
one and everything; he was the master brain guiding the 
civil disobedience movement; nobody else knew the 
technique of that movement; he alone knew when to begin 
it and when to withdraw it. The movement may succeed 
or fail; it may bring untold disasters and political reverses 
but that could make no difference to the Mahatma’s 
infallibility. ‘A Satyagrahi can never fail’ was his formula 
for declaring his own infallibility and nobody except himself 

knew who a Satyagrahi was. Thus Gandhiji became the 
judge and the counsel in his own case. These childish 
inanities and obstinacies coupled with a most severe 
austerity of life, ceaseless work and lofty character made 
Gandhiji formidable and irresistible. Many people thought 
his politics were irrational but they had either to withdraw 
from the Congress or to place their intelligence at his feet 
to do what he liked with it. In a position of such absolute 
irresponsibility, Gandhiji was guilty of blunder after 
blunder, failure after failure, and disaster after disaster. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


or Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


pana nn gl a 
No one single political victory can be claimed to his credit 
during 33 years of his political predominance. Herein I 
mention below in some detail the series of blunders whiċh 
he committed during 32 years of his undisputed leadership. 


70. Ishall now describe briefly the enormous mischief 
done by the slogans and the nostrums which Gandhiji 
prescribed and followed, in pursuance of his policy, the 
fatal results that we now know. Here are some of them: 


(a) Khilafat—As a result of the First World War, Turkey 
had lost most of its Empire in Africa and the Middle 
East. It had lost all its European Imperial possessions. 
By 1914 only a strip of land was all that was left to her 
on the continent of Europe. The young Turks had forced 
the Sultan of Turkey to abdicate and with the 
disappearance of the Sultan the Khilafat was also 
abolished. The Indian Muslims’ devotion to the Khilafat 
was strong and earnest and they believed that it was 
Britain that had brought about the downfall of the Sultan 
and the Khilafat. They therefore started a campaign for 
the revival of the Khilafat. In the moment of 
opportunism, the Mahatma misconceived the idea that 
by helping the Khilafat Movement he would become the 
leader of the Muslims in India as he already was of the 
Hindus. With the Hindu-Muslim unity thus achieved, 
the British would soon have to concede Swaraj. But 
again, Gandhiji miscalculated and by leading the Indian 
National Congress to identify itself with the Khilafat 
Movement. He quite gratuitously introduced religions 
elements which has proved a tragic and expensive 
calamity. For the moment the movement for the revival 
of the Khilafat appeared to be succeeding. The Muslims 
who were not with the Khilafat Movement soon became 
out of date and the Ali Brothers who were its foremen, 
swam on the wave of popularity and carried everything 
whatever was before them. Mr. Jinnah found himself a 
lonely figure and was of no significance for a few years. 
The movement however failed. Our British Masters were 
not unduly shaken and as a combined result of repression 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed 361 


and the Montague Chelmsford Reforms they were able 
to tide over the Khilafat Movement in a few years time. 
The Muslims had kept the Khilafat Movement distinct 
from the Congress all along. They welcomed the Congress 
support but they did not merge with it. When failure came, 
the Muslims became desperate with disappointment and 
their anger was borne by the Hindus. Innumerable riots 
in the various parts of India followed. The chief victims 
were the Hindus everywhere. The Hindu-Muslim unity 
of the Mahatma became a mirage. 


(b) Moplah Rebellion—Malabar, Punjab, Bengal and 
N.W.F. Province were the scenes of repeated outrages 
on the Hindus. The Moplah rebellion as it was called 
was the most prolonged and concentrated attack on the 
Hindu religion, Hindu honour, Hindu life and Hindu 
property; hundreds of Hindus were forcibly converted 
to Islam, women were outraged. The Mahatma who had 
brought about all this calamity on India by his communal 
policy kept mum. He never uttered a single word of 
reproach against the aggressors nor did he allow the 
Congress to take any active steps whereby repetition of 
such outrages could be prevented. On the other hand he 
went to the length of denying the numerous cases of 
forcible conversions in Malabar and actually published 
in his paper ‘Young India’ that there was only one case 
of forcible conversion. His own Muslim friends informed 
him that he was wrong and that the forcible conversions 
were numerous in Malabar. He never corrected his mis- 
statements but went to the absurd length of starting a 
relief fund for the Moplahs instead of their victims. The . 
promised land of Hindu-Muslim unity was not yet in 
sight. 


(c) Afghan Amir Intrigue—When the Khilafat movement 
failed, Ali Brothers decided to do something which might 
keep alive the Khilafat sentiments. Their slogan was that 
whoever was the enemy of the Khilafat was also the 
enemy of Islam. As the British were chiefly responsible 
for the defeat and the dethronement of the Sultan of 
Turkey, every faithful Muslim was in solemn duty bound 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


er Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


to be a bitter enemy of Britain. With that object they 
secretly intrigued to invite the Amir of Afghanistan to 
invade India and promised him every support, there is a 
long history behind this intrigue. Ali brothers never 
denied their share in the conspiracy. The Mahatma 
pursued his tactics of getting Hindu-Muslim unity by 
supporting the Ali brothers through thick and through 
thin. He publicly poured his affection on them and 
promised them unstinted support in the restoration of 
the Khilafat. Even with regard to the invasion of India 
by the Amir, the Mahatma directly and indirectly 
supported the Ali Brothers. This is proved beyond the 
shadow of a doubt. The late Mr. Shastri, Mr. C.Y. 
Chintamani the Editor of the ‘Leader’ of Allahabad and 
even the Mahatma’s lifelong friend, the Late Rev. C.F. 
Andrews told him quite clearly that his speeches and 
writings amounted to a definite support to the Ali 
Brothers in their invitation to the Amir of Afghanistan 
to invade India. The following quotation from the 
Mahatma’s writing in those days should make it clear 
that he had forgotten his own country in his one 
consuming desire to please the Muslims had become a 
party to the invasion of his motherland by a foreign Ruler. 
The Mahatma supported the invasion in the following 
words: 


I cannot understand why the Ali Brothers are going to 
be arrested as the rumors go, and why I am to remain 
free. They have done nothing which I would not do. If 
they had sent a message to Amir, I also would send one 
to inform the Amir that if he came, no Indian so long as 


nag help it, would help the Government to drive him 
ack. 


The vigilance of the British broke the conspiracy. Nothing 
came out of the Ali Brothers’ grotesque scheme to the 


invasion of India and Hindu-Muslim unity remained as 
far away as before. 


(d) G) Attack on Arya Samaj—Gandhiji ostentatiously 
displayed his love for Muslim—by a most unworthy 
and unprovoked attack on the Arya Samaj in 1924. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed “B63 


He publicly denounced the Samaj for its supposed sins 
of omission and commission. It was an utterly 
unwarranted reckless and discreditable attack, but ` 
whatever would please the Mohammedans was the 
heart's desire of Gandhiji. The Arya Samaj made a 
powerful but polite statement and for some time 
Gandhiji remained silent. The growing political 
influence of Gandhiji weakened the Arya Samaj. No 
follower of Swami Dayanand could possibly be a 
Gandhian Congressman in politics. The two things 
are entirely incompatible; but the lure of office and 
leadership has induced numerous Arya Samajists to 
play the double game of claiming to be Gandhite 
Congressmen and Arya Samajists at the same time. 
The result was that a ban on Satyartha Prakash was 
imposed by the Government of Sind four years ago. 
The Arya Samaj on the whole took it lying down. Asa 
result its hold on Hindu social and religious life has 
been further considerably crippled. Individual 
members of the Samaj are and were strong 
nationalists. The late Lala Lajpat Rai, and Swami 
Shradhanand to mention only two names were 
staunch Arya Samajists but they were foremost 
amongst the leaders of the Congress till the end of 
their life. They did not stand for blind support to 
Gandhiji, but were definitely opposed to his pro- 
Muslim policy, and openly fought him on that issue. 
But these great men are gone now. We know that the 
bulk of the Arya Samaj continues to be what they 
always were, but they are ill-informed and badly led 
by the self-seeking section of the Samaj. The Samaj 
has ceased to be the force and the power that it was 
at one time. 


(d) Gi) Gandhiji’s attack did not improve his popularity with 
the Muslims but it provoked a Muslim youth to 
murder Swami Shradhanandji within a few months. 
The charge against the Samaj that it was a reactionary 
body was manifestly false. Everybody knew that far 
from being a reactionary body the Samaj had been 
the vanguard of social reforms among the Hindus. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ae Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


The Samaj had for a hundred years stood for the 
abolition of untouchability long before the birth of 
Gandhiji. The Samaj had popularised widow re- 
marriage. The Samaj had denounced the caste system 
and preached the oneness of not merely the Hindus 
but of all those who were prepared to follow its tenets. 
Gandhiji was completely silence for some time. His 
leadership made the people forget his baseless attack 
on the Arya Samaj and even weakened the Samaj to 
a large extent. Swami Dayanand Saraswati who was 
the founder of the Arya Samaj had no fad about 
violence or non-violence. In his teaching the use of 
force was not ruled out but was permissible if morally 
desirable. It must have been a struggle for the leaders 
of the Arya Samaj whether to remain within the 
Congress or not. Gandhiji insisted on non-violence in 
all cases and Swami Dayanand made no bones about 
it. But Swamiji was dead and Gandhiji.’s star was 
ascendant in the political firmament. 


(e) Separation of Sind—By 1928 Mr. Jinnah’s stock had 
risen very high and the Mahatma had already conceded 
many unfair and improper demands of Mr. Jinnah at 
the expense of Indian democracy and the Indian Nation 
and the Hindus. The Mahatma even supported the 
separation of Sind from the Bombay presidency and 
threw the Hindus of Sind to the communal wolves. 
Numerous riots took place in Sind—Karachi, Sukkur, 
Shikarpur and where other places the Hindus were the 


only sufferers. The Hindu-Muslim unity receded further 
' from the horizon. 


(63) League’s Good Bye to Congress—With each defeat 
Gandhiji became more keen on his method of achieving 
Hindu-Muslim unity. Like the gambler who had lost 
heavily, he became more desperate; increasing his stakes 
each time. He indulged in the most irrational concessions 
if only they could placate. Mr.-Jinnah and enlist his 
support under the Mahatma’s leadership in the fight for 
freedom. The aloofness of the Muslims from the Congress 
increased in the coming years. The Muslim League 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji's Politics X-Rayed “B65 


refused to have anything to do with the Congress after 
1928. The resolution of Independence passed by the 
Congress at its Lahore Session in 1929 found the Muslims 
conspicuous by their absence and strongly aloof from the 
Congress organisation. The hope of Hindu Muslim unity 
was hardly entertained by anybody thereafter; but 
Gandhiji continued to be resolutely optimistic and 
surrendered more and more to Muslim communalism. 


(g) Round-Table Conference and Communal Award—The 
British authorities both in India and in England, had 
realised that the demand for a bigger and truer 
instalment of constitutional reforms was most insistent 
and claimant in India. In spite of their unscrupulous 
policy of ‘Divide and Rule’ and the communal discord - 
which it had generated. The resulting situation had 
brought them no permanence and security in India. They 
therefore decided by the end of 1929 to convene a Round 
Table Conference in England early in the next year and 
made a declaration to that effect. Mr. Ramsay McDonald 
was the Prime Minister and the Labour Government was 
in power. But the action was too late. The resolution of 
Independence was passed a month later at the Lahore 
Session of the Congress in spite of the aforesaid 
declaration and the Congress Party decided to boycott 
this Round Table Conference. Instead, a Salt Campaign 
was started after a few months which created 
tremendous enthusiasm and nearly 70,000 people went 
to jails in breaking the provisions of the Salt Act. The 
Congress however soon regretted its boycott of the First 
Round Table Conference and at the Karachi Congress of 
1981 it was decided to send Gandhiji alone as the 
Congress Representative to Second Session of Round 
Table Conference. Anybody who reads the proceedings, 
of that Session will realise that Gandhiji was the biggest 
factor in bringing about the total failure of the - 
Conference. Not even one of the decisions of the Round 
Table Conference was in support of democracy or 
nationalism. The Mahatma went to the length of inviting 
Mr. Ramsay Mc. Donald to give what was called the 
Communal Award, thereby strengthening the © 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ee Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


disintegrating forces of communalism which had already 
corroded the body politic for the past 24 years. The 
Mahatma was thus responsible for a direct and 
substantial intrusion of communal electorate and 
communal franchise in the future Parliament of India. 
There is no wonder that when the communal award was 
given by Mr. Ramsay McDonald, the Mahatma refused 
to oppose it and the members of the Assembly were asked 
‘Neither to support nor to reject it. Gandhiji himself put 
an axe on the communal unity on which he had staked 
so much for the previous fifteen years. No wonder under 
the garb of minority protection we got in the Government 
of India Act of 1935, a permanent statutory recognition 
of communal franchise, communal electorate and even 
weightage for the minorities, especially the Muslims, 
both in the Provinces and in the Centre. Those elected 
on the communal franchise, would be naturally 
communal minded and would have no interest in bridging 
the gulf between communalism and nationalism. The 
formation of a parliamentary party on political and 
economic grounds thus became impossible. Hindus and 
Muslims became divided in opposite camps and worked 
as rival parties, placing increased momentum to 
separatism. Almost everywhere Hindus became victims 
of communal orgies at the hands of the Muslims. People 
became perfectly cynical about any possibility of unity 
between Hindus and Muslims but the Gandhiji kept on 
repeating his barren formula all the time. (Reference: 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya’s speech against the 
acceptance of Communal Award). 


(h) Acceptance of Offices and Resigning in Huff - 
` Provincial Autonomy was introduced from the 1st of 
April, 1937 under the Government of India Act 1935. 
The Act was bristling with safeguards. Special powers, 
protection to vested interests to the British and 
continuation of the existing British personnels in the 
various services were kept in tact. The Congress: 
therefore would not accept office at first but soon found 
“out that in every Province, a Ministry was constituted 
and that at least in five Provinces they were functioning 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji's Politics X-Rayed B67 


in the normal manner. In the other six Provinces, the 
Ministers were in a minority but they were forging ahead 
with their nation building programme. The Congress felt 
that it would be left out in the cold if it persisted in its 
policy of barren negation. It therefore decided to accept 
office in July, 1937; in doing so it committed a serious 
blunder in excluding the members of the Muslim League 
from effective participation in the Cabinet. They only 
admitted into the Cabinet such Muslims as were 
congressmen. This was the right policy for a country with 
citizen franchise and without communal representation. 
But having accepted communal electorate and communal 
franchise and other paraphernalia of separatism, it 
became untenable to keep out the members of the Muslim 
League who represented the bulk of the Muslims in every 
province, where they were in a minority. The Nationalist 
Muslims who became Ministers were not representatives 
of the Muslims in the sense in which the Muslim League 
Members were and in not taking the League Members 
in the Cabinet the Congress openly repudiated its own 
action in statutorily having recognised itself communalist 
by statute. On the other hand the Muslims were quite 
unwilling to come under the Congress control. Their 
interest never needed protection. The Governors were 
there always ready and willing to offer the most 
sympathetic support. The rejection of Muslim League 
Members as Ministers gave Mr. Jinnah a tactical 
advantage which he utilised te the full. In 1989 when 
the Congress resigned Office in a huff, it completely 
played in the hands of the Muslim League and British 
Imperialism. Under Section 93 of the Government of 
India Act 1935 the Governments of the Congress 
Provinces were taken over by the Governors and the 
Muslim League Ministries remained in power and 
authority in the remaining Provinces. The Governors. 
carried on the administration with a definite leaning 
towards the Muslims as an Imperial Policy of British. 
Communalism reigned right throughout the country 
through the Muslim Ministries on the one hand and the 
pro-Muslim Governors on the other.. The Hindu-Muslim 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ser Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


unity of Gandhiji became a dream, if it were ever 
anything else; but Gandhiji never cared. His ambition 
was to become the leader of Hindus and Muslims alike 
and in resigning from the Ministries the Congress again 
sacrificed democracy and nationalism. The fundamental 
rights of the Hindus, religious, political, economic and 
social, all were sacrificed at the altar of the Mahatmic 


obstinacy. 


(i) League Taking Advantage of War—Encouraged by 
the situation thus created, the Muslim Government in 
five Provinces and the pro-Muslim Governors in the other 
six, Mr. Jinnah went ahead in full speed. The Congress 
opposed the war in one way or another. Mr. Jinnah and 
the League had a very clear policy. They remained 
neutral and created no trouble for the Government; but 
in the following year, at the Lahore session of the Muslim 
League passed a resolution for the partition of India as 
a condition for their co-operation in the war. Lord 
Linlithgow within a few months of the Lahore Resolution 
gave full support to the Muslims in their policy of 
separation by a declaration of Government Policy which 
assured the Muslims that no change in the political 
constitution of India will be made without the consent of 
all the elements in India’s national life. The Muslim 
League and Mr. Jinnah were thus vested with a veto 
over the political progress of this country by the pledge 
given by the Viceroy of India. From that day the process . 
of disintegration advanced with accumulated force. 
Muslims were not prohibited by the League from getting 
recruited to the Army, Navy and Air Force and they did 
so in large numbers. In fact the Punjab Muslims resented 
their percentage in the Indian Army at all reduced. Thus 
with a view to preparing for eventualities in a future 
Muslim State as is being done in Kashmir today, and of 
course the Muslim League never created any difficulty 
for the Government throughout the six years of the global 
war (Refer to the speech of late Sir Sikandar Hyat Khan 
delivered at Cairo before armed forced during the last 
World War). All that they wanted was that no changes 


should be made in the Constitution of India without their 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


` full consent, and that full consent, could be obtained if 
only Pakistan was conceded. This assurance was 
virtually given by Lord Linlithgow in August, 1940. 


G) Cripp’s Partition Proposal Accepted—The Congress 
did not know its own mind as to whether it should 
support the war, oppose or remain neutral. All these 
attitudes were expressed in turn one after the other; 
sometimes by way of speeches, sometimes by way of 
resolutions, sometimes through Press campaigns and 
sometimes in other ways. Government naturally felt that 
the Congress has no mind of its own except verbose 
condemnation. The war was carried on without let or - 
hindrance till 1942. The Government could get all the 
men, all the money, and all the material which their 
war efforts needed. Every Government loan was fully 
subscribed. In 1942 came the Cripps Mission. It presented 
to the Congress and to the rest of India, Dead Sea Apple 
of useless promises, coupled with a clear hint of partition 
of India in the background. Naturally the Mission failed, 
but the Congress while opposing the Mission’s proposal 
yielded to the principle of partition after a very 
pretentious resolution reiterating its adherence to 
democracy and nationalism. At a meeting of the All India 
Congress Committee held in April, 1942 at Allahabad 
the principle of partition was repudiated by an 
overwhelming majority—the minority consisting of the 
present Governor General Mr. C. Rajagopalchari and 
his half a dozen supporters.—But Maulana Azad, the so 
called nationalist Muslim, was then the President of the 
Congress. A few months later he gave a ruling that the 
Allahabad Resolution had no effect on the earlier 
resolution of the Working Committee which conceded 
the principle of Pakistan however remotely. The 
Congress was entirely at the end of its wits. The British 
Government went on effectively controlling the whole 
country through Muslim Ministries and through pro- 
Muslim Governors. The Princes wholly identified 
themselves with the war. Labour refused to keep aloof. 
The capitalist class supported the Congress in words and 
in deed by supplying the Government everything it 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


| Assassi i 
F Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


wanted at top prices. Even Khaddar enthusiasts sold 
blankets to Government. The Congress could see no way 
out of its absolute paralysis; it was out of office and 
Government carried on in spite of its nominal opposition. 


Œ) ‘Quit India’ by Congress and ‘Divide and Quit’ by 
League—Out of sheer desperation Gandhiji evolved the 
‘Quit India’ Policy which was endorsed by the Congress. 
It was supposed to be the greatest national rebellion 
against foreign rule. Gandhiji had ordered the people to 
‘do or die’. Except that the leaders were quickly arrested 
and detained behind the prison bars some furtive acts of 
violence were practised by congressmen for some weeks, 
but in less than three months the whole movement was 
throttled by the Government; in firmness and discretion. 
The movement soon collapsed. What remained, was a 
series of piteous appeals by the Congress Press and the 
Congress supporters, who were outside the jail, for the 
release of the arrested leaders without formally 
withdrawing the ‘Quit India’ movement, which had 
already collapsed. Gandhiji even staged a fast for his 
release, but for two years until the Germans were 
decisively beaten, the leaders had to remain in jails and 
our Imperial masters were triumphant all along. Mr. 
Jinnah openly opposed the ‘Quit India’ Movement as 
hostile to the Muslims and raised a counter slogan ‘Divide 
and Quit’. That is where Gandhiji’s Hindu-Muslim unity 
had arrived. 


@) Hindi versus Hindustani—Absurdly pro-Muslim 
policy of Gandhiji is nowhere more blatantly illustrated 
than in his perverse attitude on the question of the 
National Language of India. By all the tests of a scientific 
language, Hindi has the most prior claim to be accepted 
as the National Language of this country. In the 
beginning of his career in India, Gandhiji gave a great 
impetus to Hindi but as he found that the Muslims did 
not like it, he became a turncoat and blossomed forth as 
the champion of what is called Hindustani. Every body 
in India knows that there is no language called 
Hindustani; it has no grammar, it has no vocabulary; it 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji's Politics X-Rayed 71 


is a mere dialect; it is spoken but not written. It is a 
bastard tongue and a crossbreed between Hindi and Urdu 
and not even the Mahatma’s sophistry could make it 
popular. In his desire to please the Muslims he insisted 
that Hindustani alone should be the national language 
of India. His blind supporters of course blindly supported 
him and the so-called hybrid tongue began to be used. 
Words like ‘Badshah Ram’ and ‘Begum Sita’ were spoken 
and written, but the Mahatma never dared to speak of 
Mr. Jinnah as Shri Jinnah and Maul ana Azad as Pandit 
Azad. All his experiments were at the expense of the 
Hindus. His was a one-way traffic in his search of Hindu- 
Muslim unity. The charm and the purity of the Hindi 
language was to be prostituted to please the Muslims. 
Even Congressmen, from the rest of India, refused to 
digest this nostrum. He continued to persist in his » 
support to Hindustani. The bulk of the Hindus however 
proved to be stronger and more loyal to their culture 
and to their mother tongue and refused to bow down to 
the Mahatmic fiat. The result was that Gandhiji did not 
prevail in the Hindi Parishad and had to resign from 
that body. His pernicious influence however remains and 
the Congress Governments in India still hesitate whether 
to select Hindi or Hindustani as the National language 
of India. The barest common sense should make it clear 
to the meanest intelligence that the language of 80 per 
cent of the people must be the language of the country , 
but his ostentatious support of the Muslims made him 
look almost idiotic when he continued to stand for 
Hindustani. Happily there are millions and millions of © 
champions of the Hindi language and the Devnagari 
script. The U.P. Government has adopted Hindi as the 
language of the Province. The Committee appointed by 
the Government of India has translated the whole of the 
Draft Constitution in pure Hindi. It now remains for the 
Congress Party in the legislature to adopt the 
commonsense view in favour of Hindi or assert their 
loyalty to the Mahatma in their mad endeavour to force 
a language on a great country like India. For practical 
purpose Hindustani is only Urdu undera different name, 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ae Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


but Gandhiji could not have the courage to advocate the 
adoption of Urdu as against Hindi, hence the subterfuge 
to smuggle Urdu under the garb of Hindustani. Urdu ig 
not banned by any nationalist Hindu but to smuggle it 
under the garb of Hindustani is a fraud and a crime, 
that is what the Mahatma tried to do. To bolster up a 
dialect in School Curriculum and in educational 
institutions that non-existent language in the garb bf 
Hindustani because it pleased the Muslims was the 
communalism of the worst type on the part of the 
Mahatma. All these for Hindu-Muslim unity. 


(m) Vande Mataram Not to be Sung—The infatuation of 
Gandhiji for the Muslims and his incorrigible craving 
for Muslim leadership without any regard for right or 
wrong, for truth or justice, and in utter contempt of the 
sentiments of the Hindus as a whole was the high water- 
mark of the Mahatmic benevolence. It is notorious that 
some Muslims disliked the celebrated song of Vande 
Mataram’ and the Mahatma forthwith stopped its singing 
or recital wherever he could. This song has been 
honoured for a century as the most inspiring exhortation 
to the Bengalees to stand up, like one mass for their 
nation. In the anti-partition agitation of 1905, in Bengal 
the song came to a special prominence and popularity. 
The Bengalees swore by it and dedicated themselves to 
the Motherland at countless meetings where this song 
was sung. The British Administrator did not understand 
the true meaning of the song which simply meant ‘Hail 
Motherland. Government therefore banned its singing 
forty years ago for some time. That led to its increased 
popularity all over the country. It continued to be sung 
at all Congress and other national gatherings but as soon 
as one Muslim objected to it, Gandhiji utterly disregarded 
the national sentiment behind it and persuaded the 
Congress, not to insist upon the singing as the national 
song. We are now asked to adopt Rabindranath Tagore’s 
‘Jana Gana Mana’, as a substitute for ‘Vande Mataram’. 
Could anything be more demoralising or pitiful than this 
brazen-faced action against a song of world-wide fame? 
Simply because one ignorant fanatic disliked it. The right 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Sendhil’ Poles Ase re 


way to proceed would have been to enlighten the ignorant 
and remove the prejudice. But that is the policy which 
during the thirty years of unbounded popularity and 
leadership Gandhiji could not muster courage to try. His 
Hindu-Muslim unity idea only meant to surrender, 
capitulate, and concede whatever the Muslims wanted. 
No wonder, the ‘Will O’ the Wasp’ unity never came and 
never could have come. 


(n) Shiva Bavani Banned—Gandhiji banned the public 
recital or perusal of Shiva Bavani a beautiful collection 
of 52 verses by a Hindu poet in which he had extoled the 
great power of Shivaji and the protection which he 
brought to the Hindu community and the Hindu religion. 
The refrain of that collection says, “Jf there were no 
Shivaji, the entire country would have been converted to 
Islam.” Here I recite the couplet from the Book ‘Shiva 
Bavani’ ending with the words: 


Kashiji Ki Kalajati, Mathura masjid hoti 
Shivaji jo na hote to Sunnat hoti Sabki 


This was the delight of millions of people interested in 
knowing contemporary history and is a beautiful piece 
of literature. But Gandhiji would have none of it. Hindu- 
Muslim unity indeed! 


(0) Suhrawardy Patronised—When the Muslim League 
refused to join the provisional Government which Lord 
Wavell invited Pandit Nehru to form; the League started 
a Council of direct action against any Government formed 
by Pandit Nehru. On the 15th of August 1946, a little 
more than two weeks before Pandit Nebru was to take 
office, there broke out in Calcutta an open massacre of 
the Hindus which continued for three days unchecked. 
The horrors of those days are described in the ‘Statesman’ 
newspaper of Calcutta. At that time it was considered 
that the Government which could permit such outrages 
on its citizens must be thrown out. There were 
suggestions that Mr. Suhrawardy’s Government should 
be dismissed. But the socialist Governor refused to take 
up the administration under Section 93 of the 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ar Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


Government of India Act. Gandhiji however went to 
Calcutta and contracted a strange friendship with the 
author of these massacres. In fact he intervened on behalf . 
of Suhrawardy and the Muslim League. During the three 
days that the massacre of Hindus took place, the police 
in Calcutta did not interfere for the protection of life or 
property; innumerable outrages were practised under 
the very eyes and nose of the guardians of law. But 
nothing mattered to Gandhiji. To him Suhrawardy was 
an object of admiration from which he could not be 
diverted and publicly described Suhrawardy as a Martyr’. 
No wonder two months later there was the most virulent 
outbreak of Muslim fanaticism in Noakhali and Tipperah, 
30,000 Hindu women were forcibly converted according 
to a report of Arya Samaj. The total number of Hindus 
killed or wounded was three lacs. Not to say that the 
crores of rupees worth of property was looted and 
destroyed. Gandhiji then undertook, ostensibly alone, a 
tour of Noakhali District. It is well-known that 
Suhrawardy gave him protection wherever he went and 
even with that protection Gandhiji never ventured to 
enter Noakhali District. All these outrages, loss of life 
and property were done when Suhrawardy was the 
Prime Minister and to such a monster of inequity and 

- communal poison, Gandhiji gave the unsolicited title of 
‘Martyr’. 


(p) Attitude towards Hindus and Muslim Princes— 
Gandhiji’s followers successfully humiliated the Jaipur, 
Bhavnagar and Rajkot States princes. They enthusiastically 
supported even a rebellion in Kashmir State against the 
Hindu prince. This attitude strangely enough contrasts 
with what Gandhiji did about the affairs in Muslim 
States. There was a Muslim League intrigue in Gwalior 
State; as a result of which the Maharaja was compelled 
to abandon the celebrations of the second millennium of 
the Vikram Calender four years ago. The Muslim 
agitation was based on pure communalism. The 
Maharaja is the liberal and impartial Ruler with a far 

j sighted outlook. In a recent casual Hindu Muslim clash 
in Gwalior the Musalmans suffered some casualties 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed “B75 


Gandhiji came down upon the Maharaja with a vitriolic 
attack which was wholly undeserved. 


(q) Gandhiji on Fast to Capacity—In 1943 while Gandhiji 
was on fast to capacity and nobody was allowed to 
interview him on political affairs, only the nearest and 
the dearest had the permission to go and enquire of his 
health. Mr. C. Rajagopalachari smuggled himself into 
Gandhiji’s room and hatched a plot of conceding Pakistan. 
Gandhiji allowed him to negotiate with Jinnah. Gandhiji 
later on discussed this matter for three weeks with 
Mr. Jinnah in the latter part of 1944 and offered Mr. 
Jinnah virtually what is now called Pakistan. Gandhiji 
went everyday to Mr. Jinnah’s house. Flattered him, 
praised him, embraced him, but Mr. Jinnah could not 
be cajoled out of his demand for the Pakistan pound of 
flesh. Hindu Muslim unity was making progress in the 
negative direction. 


(rt) Desai-Liaquat Agreement—(i) In 1945 came the 
notorious Desai-Liaquat Agreement. It put one more, 
almost the last, nail on the coffin of the Congress as a 
National democratic body. Under that agreement, the 
late Mr. Bhulabhai Desai the then leader of the Congress 
Party in the Central Legislative Assembly at Delhi 
entered into an agreement with Mr. Liaquat Ali Khan, » 
the League Leader in the Assembly to jointly demand a 
Conference with the British Government for the solution 
of the stalemate in Indian politics, which was growing 
since the beginning of the War. Mr. Desai was understood 
to have taken that step without consulting anybody of 
any importance in the Congress circle, as almost all the 
Congress leaders had been detained since the ‘Quit India’ 
Resolution in 1942. Mr. Desai offered equal 
representation to the Muslims with Congress at the said 
Conference and this was the basis on which the Viceroy 
was approached to convene the Conference. The then 
Viceroy Lord Wavell, flew to London on receipt of this 
joint request and brought back the consent of the Labour 
Government for holding the Conference. The official 
announcement in this behalf stupefied the country on 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


— Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


account of its treachery to nationalism and democracy 
to which the Congress had become a party. Indian 
democracy was stabbed in the back and every principle 
of justice was violated. The Congress members quickly 


knowledge and consent. With the full agreement of the 
Congress party, 25% of the people of India were treated 
as if they were 50% and the 75% were brought down to 
the level of 50%. The Viceroy also laid down other 
conditions for holding the Conference. They were: 


1. An unqualified undertaking on the part of the 
Congress and all political parties to support the war 
against Japan until the victory. 


2. A coalition Government would be formed in which 
the Congress and the Muslims would each have five 
representatives. Besides there will be a representative 
of the depressed classes, of the Sikhs and other 
Minorities. 

3. The ‘Quit India’ movement will unconditionally be 
withdrawn and the Congress leaders detained, in 
consequence of the movement would be released. 


4. All measures of Administrative Reform will be within 
the four corners of the Government of India Act 1935. 


5. The Governor General and the Viceroy shall retain 
the same constitutional position in the new setup a8 
they had at that time i.e., the viceroy would remain 
the head of the new Government. 


6. At the end of the war, the question of complete 
freedom will be decided through the machinery of the 
Constituent Assembly. 


7. If these were accepted without any modification the 
Viceroy would reconstitute his Government with 
portfolios to be held by Indians as per clause (2) above. 


8. People who had only three years ago started the ‘Quit 
India’ movement for complete Independence an 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed B77 


exhorted the other people to ‘Do or Die’ in implementing 
the rebellion, quietly submitted to accept office under 
the leadership of a British Viceroy on the terms, and 
conditions laid down by him. The fact was that the 
‘Quit India’ movement had failed, the Congress had 
no alternative programme and events were moving 
on whether the Congress party was ready for them 
or. not. Mr. Jinnah was the only gainer from the 
collapse of the Congress. He obtained a great tactical 
advantage by the recognition of the Muslims’ right to 
50% representation in all future discussions. The two- 
nation theory and the demand for Pakistan received 
a fillip although the Conference failed without 
achieving the Hindu-Muslim unity. 


(e) Cabinet Mission Plan—Early in the year 1946 the so- 
called Cabinet mission arrived in India. It consisted of 
the then Secretary of State for India now Lord Lawrence, 
Mr. Alexander, the Minister for War and Sir Stafford 
Cripps. Its arrival was heralded by a speech in 
Parliament by Mr. Atlee, the Prime Minister. Mr. Atlee 
announced in most eloquent terms the determination of 
the British Government to transfer power to India if the 
latter agreed upon common plan. The agreement was 
the pivot of the work of the mission but it was fatal. The 
Congress was honestly for a United India, but it was not 
outright in its conviction. It lacked firmness. Mr. Jinnah 
on the other hand demanded a divided India but he 
demanded it firmly. Between these two opposite 
demands, the mission found it impossible to bring about 
an agreement and after some further informal 
discussions with both, the mission announced its own 
solution on the 15th May 1946. It rejected and gave ten 
good reasons for that rejection but while firmly 
championing the unity of India the mission introduced 
Pakistan through the back-door. In paragraph 15 of the 
proposals the Mission introduced six conditions under 
which the British Government would be prepared to 
convene a Constituent Assembly invested with the right 
of framing a Constitution of Free India. Each of these 
six proposals were calculated to prevent the unity of India 
being maintained or full freedom being attained even if 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


the Constituent Assembly was an elected body. The 
Congress party was SO utterly exhausted by the failure 
of ‘Quit India’ that after some smoke-screen about its 
unflinching nationalism, it virtually submitted to 
Pakistan by accepting the Mission's proposals which 
made certain the dismemberment of India although in a 
roundabout manner. The Congress accepted the scheme 
but did not agree to form a Government, The long and 
short of it was that the Congress was called upon to form 
a Government and accept the whole scheme 
unconditionally. Mr. Jinnah denounced the British 
Government for treachery and started a direct action 
council of the Muslim League. The Bengal, the Punjab, 
the Bihar, the Bombay, and other places in various parts 
of India became scenes of bloodshed, arson, loot and rape 
on a scale unprecedented in ‘history’. The overwhelming 
number of victims were Hindus. The Congress stood 
aghast but impotent and could not give any protection 
to the Hindus anywhere. The Governor General in spite 
of his powers to intervene under the Act of 1935 in case 
of a breach of peace and tranquility in India or in any 
part of it merely looked on and made no use of his 
obligations under the Act. A few lakhs of people were 
killed, many thousands of women and children were 
kidnapped and few of them have not yet been traced, 
thousands and thousands of women were raped, 
hundreds crores of property was looted, burnt or 
destroyed. The Mahatma, as far as ever before was far 
away from his goal of Hindu-Muslim unity. 


(t) Congress Surrenders to Jinnah—By the following 
year the Congress Party abjectly surrendered to Mr. 
Jinnah at the point of bayonet and accepted Pakistan. 
What happened thereafter, is too well known. The thread 
running throughout this narrative is the increasing 
infatuation which Gandhiji developed for the Muslims. 
He uttered not one word of sympathy or comfort for 
millions of displaced Hindus; he had only one eye for 
Kumanity and that was for the Muslim humanity. The 
Hindus simply did not count to him. I was shocked by 
all these manifestations of Gandhian saintliness. 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji's- Politics X-Rayed %79 


(u) Ambiguous Statement about Pakistan—In one of 
his articles, Gandhiji while nominally ostensibly opposed 
to Pakistan, openly declared that if the Muslims wanted 
Pakistan at any cost, there was nothing to prevent them 
from achieving it. Only the Mahatma could understand 
what that declaration meant. Was it a prophesy-or a 
declaration or disapproval of the demand for Pakistan? 


(v) Ill Advice to Kashmir Maharaja—About Kashmir, 
Gandhiji again and again declared that Sheikh Abdullah 
should be entrusted the charge of the State and that the 
Maharaja of Kashmir should retire to Benares for no 
particular reason, other than that the Muslims formed 
the bulk of the Kashmir population. This also stands 
out in contrast with his attitude on Hyderabad where 
although the bulk of the population is Hindu, Gandhiji 
never called upon the Nizam to retire to Mecca. 


(w) Mountbatten vivisects India—From August 15, 1946 
onwards the private armies of the Muslim League began 
killing, devastating and destroying the Hindus wherever 
they could lay their hands on. Lord Wavell, the then 
Viceroy was undoubtedly greatly distressed at what was ~ 
happening; but he did not use his powers under the 
Government of India Act of 1935 to prevent such a 
holocaust. Hindu blood began to flow from Bengal to 
Karachi with mild reactions in the Deccan. All the time 
from the 2nd September 1946 the so-called National 
Government consisting of two hybrid elements utterly 
reconcilable to each other was in office. The Muslim 
League members who were 50% of the Congress, did 
every thing in their power to make the working of a 
Coalition Government impossible: The Muslim League 
members did everything they could, to sabotage the 
coalition Government. The more they became disloyal 
and treasonable to the Government of which they formed 
a part, the greater was Gandhiji’s infatuation for them. 
Lord Wavell had to resign as he could not bring about a 
settlement. He had some conscience which prevented 
him from supporting the partition of India. He had openly 
declared it to be unnecessary and undesirable. But his 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


r 

i was followed by the appointment of Lord 
a eee King Log was followed by King Stork, This 
Supreme Commander of the South East Asia was a 
purely military man and he had a great reputation for 
daring, and tenacity- He came to India with a 
determination to do or die, and he ‘did’, namely he 
vivisected India. He was more indifferent to human 
slaughter. Rivers of blood flowed under his very eyes 
and nose. He apparently was thinking that by the 
slaughter of Hindus so many opponents of his mission 
were killed, the greater the slaughter of the enemies 
greater the victory, and he pursued his aim relentlessly 
to its logical-conclusion. Long before June 1948 the official 
date for handing over power, the wholesale murders of 
the Hindus had their full effect. The Congress which 
had boasted of its nationalism and democracy secretly 
accepted Pakistan literally at the point of the bayonet 
and abjectly surrendered to Mr. Jinnah. India was 
vivisected. One third of the Indian territory became 
foreign land to us from the 15th of August 1947. Lord 
Mountbatten came to be described in Congress circles 
as the greatest Viceroy and Governor General India had 
ever known. He had gifted ten months earlier than 30th 
June 1948 what is called Dominion status to vivisected 
India. This is what Gandhiji had achieved after thirty 
years of undisputed dictatorship and this is what the 
Congress Party calls ‘Freedom’. Never in the history of 
the world has such slaughter been officially connived at, 
or the result, described as ‘Freedom’ and ‘Peaceful 
Transfer of Power’. If what happened in India in 1946, 
1947 and 1948 is to be called peaceful, one wonders what 
would be the violent. Hindu Muslim unity bubble was 
finally burst and a theocratic and communal State 
dissociated from everything that smacked of United 
India, was established with the consent of Nehru and 
his crowd. They have called it Freedom won by them at 

sacrifice —Whose sacrifice ? 


(x) Gandhiji on Cow-Slaughter—Gandhiji used to display 
a most vehement desire for the protection of the cow. 


But in fact he did no effort in that direction. On the 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji’s Politics X-Rayed `- 5 381 


contrary, in one of his post-prayer speeches, he has 
admitted his inability to support the demand for stopping 
cow-slaughter. An extract from his speech in this 
connection is reproduced below; 


Today Rajendra Babu informed me that he had 

received some fifty-thousand postcards, 20-30 

thousand telegrams urging prohibition of cow- 

slaughter by law. In this connection I have spoken to 

you before also. After all why are so many letters and 

telegrams are sent to me. They have not served any 

purpose. No law prohibiting cow-slaughter in India 
can be enacted. How can I impose my will upon a 
person who does not wish voluntarily to abandon cow- 

slaughter? India does not belong exclusively to the 

Hindus. Muslims, Parsees or Christians. All live here. 

The claim of the Hindus that India has become the | 
land of the Hindus is totally incorrect. This land 

belongs to all who live here. I know an orthodox 

Vaishnava Hindu. He used to give beef soup to, his 

child. 


(y) Removal of Tri-Colour Flag—The tricolour flag with 
the Charkha on it was adopted by the Congress as the 
National Flag out of deference to Gandhiji. There were 
flag salutations on innumerable occasions. The flag was 
unfurled at every Congress meeting. It fluttered in 
hundreds at every session of National Congress. The 
prabhat pheries were never complete unless the flag was 
carried while the march was on. On the occasion of every 
imaginary or real success of the Congress party, public 
meetings, shops and private residences were decorated 
with that flag. If any Hindu attached any importance to , 
Shivaji’s Hindu Flag, Bhagva Zenda’the flagiwhich freed ~ 
India from the Muslim domination, it was considered 
communal. Gandhiji’s tricoloured flag never protected 
any Hindu woman from outrage or a Hindu temple from 
desecration, yet the late Bhai Parmanand was once 
mobbed by enthusiastic Congressmen for not paying 
homage to that flag. University students showed their 
patriotism by mounting that flag on University buildirig. 


r 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Why | Assassinated . 
82 F y | Assassinated Gandhi 


— A Mayor of Bombay is believed to have lost his 

-knighthood because his wife hoisted this flag on the 
Corporation building. Such was supposed to be the 
allegiance of the Congress people to their National Flag? 
When the Mahatma was touring Noakhali and Tipper 
in 1946 after the beastly outrages on the Hindus, the 
flag was flying on his temporary hut. But when a Muslim 
came there and objected to the presence of the flag on 
his head, Gandhiji quickly directed its removal. All the 
reverential sentiments of millions of Congressmen 

_ towards that flag were affro. ‘ed in a minute, because 
that would please an isolated Muslim fanatic and yet 
the great catholic Mahatma never got nearer to the so- 
called Hindu-Muslim. unity. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


PART Ill 
GANDHIJI AND INDEPENDENCE 


71. Some good number of people are labouring under 
the delusion that the freedom movement in India started 
with the advent of Gandhiji in 1914-15 and reached its 
consummation on the 15th August 1947, on the day it is 
said we attained Freedom under the leadership of the 
‘Father of the Nation.’ In all the history, there was never 
a more stupendous fiction fostered by the cunning and 
believed by the credulous in this country for over a 
thousand years. Far from attaining freedom under his 
leadership, Gandhiji has left India torn and bleeding from 
a thousand wounds. There has always been a freedom 
movement alive in India which has never been suppressed. 
When the Mahratha Empire was finally subdued in 1818, 
British thought the forces of freedom were lying low for 
some time in some part of India but actually challenging 
the supremacy of the British so far as Northern India was 
concerned through the rise of Sikh power: And when by 
1848 the Sikhs were defeated at Gujrat the rebellion of 
1857 was being actively organised. It came with such 
suddenness and force and was so widespread that the 
British Imperialists began to shake in their shoes and more 
than once they seriously considered leaving India. The 
history of the great effort on the part of the Indian people 
to overthrow the British yoke has been vividly described 
in the pages of Veer Savarkar’s ‘War of Independence - 
1857’. By the time the British had fully regained control, 
the Indian National Congress was established once more - 
to challenge the British domination. From 1885 the 
National urge for freedom began to assert itself, first 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by. eGangotri 


ae Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


ea, ot 2 
through constitutional methods, later by militant methods, 
The last one developed into armed- resistance which openly 
d itself through the bomb of Khudi Ram Bose in 


asserte: 
1906. 
72. Gandhiji arrived in India 1914-15. Nearly eight 
years earlier, the revolutionary movement had spread over 
a large part of India. The freedom movement had never 
. died out. It had risen again like the Phoenix from its ashes. 
After the arrival of Gandhiji and his fads of truth and 
non-violence, the movement began to suffer eclipse. 
Thanks however to Subhash Chandra Bose and the 
revolutionaries in Maharashtra, Punjab and Bengal, that 
the movement continued to flourish, parallel to Gandhiji’s 
rise to leadership after the death of Lokamanya Tilak. 


73. Even the constitutional movements carried on by 
the moderates in the Congress registered some progress 
towards Freedom. In 1892 the British Government was 
obliged to extend the then Legislative Councils. This was 
followed by the Morley-Minto Reforms in 1909 when for 
the first time the elected representatives of the people 
secured the right to participate in the work of the 
Legislatures, both by their voices and their votes. Twelve 
years later, after the first World War, the Montague 
Chelmsford Reforms conceded partial Provincial Autonomy 
and also increased the number of elected members 80 a8 
to give permanent non-official majority both at the Centre 
and in the Provinces. And in 1935, came the complete 
Provincial Autonomy and substantial Central 
responsibility which covered every subject except foreign 
policy, army, and to some extent Finance. Gandhiji had 
no love for Parliamentary bodies. He called them 
prostitutes, and always urged their boycott. Yet the 
constitutional progress upto 1935, little though it was, had 


been achieved. The A jousl 
eved. ct of 1935 was of course seriously 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Doe IT 


—— 


Gandhiji and Independence “¥ 85 


ganct Se 
defective. More especially because of the numerous and 
vexatious safeguards, granted to the British vested 
interests and the premium it placed on communalism. 

74. There was further objection to it on the ground 
of the veto which it granted to the Governors and the 
‘Governor General.’ Even then it is reasonably certain that 
if the Act had not been boycotted under Gandhiji’s 
leadership, India would have long since reached the status 
of a Dominion which we are now supposed to be enjoying, 
after losing one-third of Indian territory. 


75. Ihave already mentioned the revolutionary party 
which existed independent of the Congress. Amongst its 
sympathisers were many active Congressmen. This latter 
section was never reconciled to the yoke of Britain. During 
the First World War between 1914-1919 the Congress 
began to turn left and the terrorist movement outside was 
running parallel to the leftist party within. The Gadar 
Party was operating simultaneously in Europe and 
America in an effort to overthrow British Rule in India 
with the help of the Axis Powers. The ‘Komagata Maru’ 
incident is well known, and it is by no means clear that 
the ‘Emden’ incident on the Madras beach was not to the 
knowledge of the German Commander that India was 
seething with discontent. But from 1920 upwards, 
Gandhiji discouraged, put his foot down on the use of force 
although he himself carried on an active campaign for 
recruitment for soldiers to Britain only a few years earlier. 
The Rowlatt Report described at length the strength of 
the revolutionaries in India. From 1906 till 1918 one 
Britisher after another and his Indian stooges were shot 
dead by the-revolutionary nationalists and the British 
authorities were trembling about their very existence. It 
was then that Mr. Montague came to this country as 
Secretary of State for India and promised the introduction 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


sF Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


stern the tide of revolutionary fervor. The Government of 
India Act 1919 was over-shadowed by the Jallianwalla 
Bagh Tragedy in which hundreds of Indians were shot dead 
by General Dwyer at a public meeting for the crime of 
holding a protest against the Rowlatt Act. Sir Michael 
O’Dwyer became notorious for callous and unscrupulous 
reprisals against those who had denounced iie Rowlatt Act. 
Twenty years later he had to pay for it, when Udham Singh 
shot him dead in London. Madanlal Dhingra, Kanhere, 
Bhagat Singh, Rajguru Sukhdeo, Chandrashekhar Azad 
were the living examples of protest by Indian youth against 
the alien yoke. They had unfurled and held aloft the flag of 
Independence, some of them long before Gandhiji’s name 
was heard of and even when he was accepted the leader of 
the constitutional movement of the Indian National 
Congress. 
76. I had already stated that the revolutionary 
movement beginning in Bengal and Maharashtra later 
on reached Punjab. The young men associated with it did 
not come from the riff-raff of society. They were educated, 
cultural men belonging to most respectable families having 
high social status in private life. They sacrificed lives of 
comfort and ease at the altar of the liberty of the 
Motherland. They were the martyrs whose blood became 
the cementing force of the Indian Independence. Lokmanya 
Tilak built on it and the Mahatma got advantage of the 
accumulated momentum of this movement. It is my firm 
conviction that each stage of constitutional progress 
between 1909 and 1935 became possible as a result of the 
revolutionary forces working in the background. 


77. Moderate opinion condemned the revolutionary 
violence. Gandhiji publicly denounced it day after day on 
every platform and through the press. There is however 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji and Independence “¥ 87 
EEE 


little doubt that the overwhelming mass of the people gave 
their silent but whole-hearted support to the vanguard of 
the armed resistance working for national freedom. The 
theory of the revolution is that a nation always tries to 
wage a war on its alien conquerors. It owes no allegiance 
to the conqueror, and the very fact of its domination carries 
with it a notice to him that he may be overthrown any 
moment. The judgments passed on the armed resistance 
by a subject people to the foreign master, on the principle 
of allegiance of the citizen to his State is altogether beside 
the mark. And the more the Mahatma condemned the use 
of force in the country’s battle for freedom, the more 
popular it became. This fact was amply demonstrated at 
the Karachi session of the Congress in March 1931; in the 
teeth of Gandhiji’s opposition a resolution was passed in 
the open session admiring the courage and the spirit of 
sacrifice of Bhagat Singh when he threw the bomb in the 
Legislative Assembly in 1929. Gandhiji never forgot this 
defeat and when a few months later, Mr. Hotson, the. 
Acting Governor of Bombay was shot at by Gogate, 
Gandhiji returned the charge at an All-India Congress 
Committee meeting and asserted that the admiration 
expressed by the Karachi Congress for Bhagat Singh was 
at the bottom of Gogate’s action in shooting at Hotson. 
This astounding statement was challenged by Subhash 
Chandra Bose in the meeting of the same A.I.C.C. He 
immediately came into disfavour with Gandhiji. To sum 
up, the share of revolutionary youth in the fight for Indian 
Freedom, is by no means negligible and those who talk of 
India’s freedom having been secured by Gandhiji are not 
only ungrateful lot but are trying to write the false history. 
The true history of India from 1895 onwards for the 
freedom of the country will never be written so long as 
Indian affairs are in charge of the Gandhian Group. The 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


A Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


AU a a. pS 
memorable share of the youth will be kept back. It is 
nevertheless true that they have played a noble and 
creditable part. 

78. It were not merely those who advocate the use 
of force in the freedom battle whom Gandhiji opposed. Even 
those who held political views radically different from his 

one, and those who did not accept his nostrums, whom 
Gandhiji made them the target of displeasure. An 
outrageous example of his dislike of people with whom he 
did not agree is the case of Subhash Chandra Bose. So far 
as I am aware, no protest was ever made by Gandhiji 
against the deportation of Subhash for six years and Bose’s 
election to the Presidential chair of the Haripura Congress 
was rendered possible only after he had personally 
disavowed any sympathy for violence. In actual practice 
however Subhash never toed the line that Gandhiji 
wanted, during his term of office. And yet, Subhash, was 
so popular in the country that against the declared wishes 
of Gandhiji in favour of Dr. Pattabhi, he was elected 
president of the Congress for a second time with a 
substantial majority even from the Andhra Desha, the 
province of Dr. Pattabhi himself. This upset Gandhiji 
beyond endurance and he expressed his anger in the 
Mahatmic manner full of concentrated venom by stating 
that the success of Subhash was his defeat and not that of 
Dr. Pattabhi. Even after this declaration, his anger against 
Subhash Bose was not gratified. Out of sheer cursedness, 
he absented himself from the Tripura Congress session, 
staged a rival show at Rajkot by a wholly mischievous 
fast, and not until Subhash was overthrown from the 
Congress gaddi that the venom of Gandhiji became 
completely gutted. 


79. This incident of the re-election of Subhash to the 
Congress crown and of his eventual expulsion from 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji and Independence 89 


residential office, is an indication of the hypocrisy with 
which the Mahatma controlled and repudiated the 
Congress as and when he liked. He had repeatedly stated 
after 1934 with a great show of detachment, that he was. 
a four anna member of the Congress Party and he had 
nothing to do with it. But when Subhash was elected for a 
second time, Gandhiji completely lost his balance and 
furnished the best proof that he had interfered with that 
election from the very inception in favour of Dr. Pattabhi; 
it is a proof of his keen and engrossing interest in the 
rivalries and petty squabbles within the Congress at every 
stage while professing to be not even a member of that 
body. 

80. When the ‘Quit India’ Movement was launched 
by the Congress, on 8th August 1942 on the initiative of 
Gandbiji, most of its leaders were quickly arrested by 
Government before they could make any start and the 
movement though it was non-violent, was nipped in the 
bud. There was another section in the Congress itself which 
went underground. The latter were not overanxious to 
follow the Gandhian technique and to go to jail. On the 
contrary, they wanted to avoid going to jail as long as 
possible and in the meantime do the maximum damage 
‘to Government by cutting communications, committing 
arson, loot and other acts of violence, not excluding murder. 
The statement of Gandhiji exhorting the people to ‘Do or 
Die’ was interpreted by that section as giving them full 
scope for all kinds of obstruction and sabotage. In fact they 
did everything to paralyse the war effort of Government 
to the fullest extent. Police Thanas were burnt, postal 
communications were violently interrupted. In north Bihar 
and other places, nearly 900 railway stations were either 
burnt or destroyed and the administration was almost 
brought to a standstill for some time. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
90 


81. These activities were directly opposed to the 
Congress creed of non-violence and to the satyagrah 
technique. Gandhiji could neither support nor oppose these 
latter activities. If he supported them, his creed of non- 
violence would stand exposed. If he opposed them publicly 
he would become unpopular with the masses who did not 
care one brass button whether the expulsion of the British 
from India was accomplished by violence or non-violence, 
In fact, the ‘Quit India’ campaign was known more for its 
acts of violence on the part of Congress supporters than 
for anything else. Gandhiji’s non-violence had died within 
few weeks of starting the ‘Quit India’ campaign while the 
violence that was being committed under that name found 
no favour with him. The Gandhian point of view was 
entirely absent from the activities of the Congress party 
and its supporters within a few weeks of the 8th August 
1942. Nowhere was non-violence either preached or 
practised as the supporters of the campaign were, in the 
words of Gandhiji himself, prepared to ‘Do or Die’. It was 
only when Lord Linlithgow in his correspondence with 
Gandhiji in 1943 categorically challenged him to own or 
disown the violence on the part of the supporters of the 
‘Quit India’ campaign, that Gandhiji was forced to condemn 
that violence. Whatever embarrassment, damage, 
inconvenience and harm was done to the war efforts, was 
the résult of the violent activities of the Congress 
supporters and not the so-called non-violence of the 
Mahatma. Non-violence had completely failed; violence to 
some extent appeared to have succeeded, but Gandhiji had 
to denounce it from the jail. The revolutionary struggle 
for independence was thus discouraged by Gandhiji while 


his own strategy had completely collapsed soon after the 
8th August 1942. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji and Independence 91 


82. By this time, Mr. Subhash Chandra Bose, who 
had mysteriously escaped from India early in January 
1942 had already arrived in Japan after reaching Berlin 
through Afghanistan. The way in which Mr. Subhash 
Chandra Bose escaped from Calcutta in January 1941 and 
the hardships and sufferings which he had to undergo on 
his way through the Indian Frontier to Kabul and thence 
to Berlin are vividly described by Mr. Uttam Chand in his 
book ‘When Bose was Ziauddhin’. The courage and tenacity 
with which Bose faced all privations, all dangers, all 
difficulties, eventually reaching Berlin made the most 
thrilling and romantic reading. By the time of the arrival 
of the Cripps Mission in India in 1942 he had already 
reached Japan and was organising an invasion of India. . 
Before Subhash left Germany, Hitler had honoured him 
with the title of His Excellency. On reaching Japan he 
found the Japanese ready to assist him against the British 
in the invasion of the country. Japan had already joined 
the war on the side of the axis by the attack on the Pearl 
Harbour in America; Germany had declared war on Russia. 
Britain and France in turn, had declared war on Italy, 
Germany and Japan. In Japan, Federated Malaya States, 
Burma and in other parts of the Far East, Subhash 
received most enthusiastic welcome and immense support 
from the Indians settled there. 


83. The Japanese had intensified their war effort 
and occupied Burma, Dutch East Indies, Federated Malaya 
States and the whole of the Far East including the 
Andaman Islands. Subhash Chandra Bose was thereby 
abled to start a provisional Indian Republican Government 
on Indian territory. By 1944 he was equipped to start an 
invasion of India with the help of the Japanese. Pandit 
Nehru declared that if Subhash Chandra Bose came into 
India with the support of the Japanese he would fight 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


92 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


ar o ete Ne 
Subhash. Early in 1944, Japanese and the Indian National 
Army organised by Subhash were thundering at the gates 
of India and they had already entered Manipur State and 
some part of the Assam Frontier. The I.N.A. consisted of 
volunteers from the Indian population of the Far East and 
of those Indians who had deserted to the I.N.A. from the 
Japanese prisons. That the campaign eventually failed 
was no fault of Subhash; his men fought like the Trojans. 
But his difficulties were far too great and his army was 
not sufficiently equipped with modern armaments. The 
LN.A. had no aeroplanes and their supply-line was weak. 
Many died of starvation and illness as there was no 
adequate medical treatment available to them. But the 
spirit which Subhash engendered in them was wonderful. 
He was lovingly described by them as ‘Netaji’ Subhash 
Chandra Bose, and they had adopted the slogan of ‘Jai 
Hind’ under his leadership. 
_ 84. Gandhiji was opposed to Subhash Chandra Bose’s 
invasion of India. Nehru was opposed to him because he 
did not approve of Bose’s support to the Japanese invader. 
But whatever differences may have existed between Bose 
and the other Indian leaders, there was no doubt that 
Subhash was loved more than any other leader because of 
his single-handed effort to destroy British imperialism. If 
Subhash had been alive and had entered India in 1945 
after the defeat of the Japanese army, the whole Indian 
population would, like one man, have been behind him 
and given him the most affectionate welcome. But Gandhiji 
was again more lucky; Lokmanya Tilak died in 1920 and 
Gandhiji became the unchallenged leader. Success of 
Subhash Chandra would have a crushing defeat for 
Gandhiji, but luck was again on his side and Subhash 
Chandra died outside India. It then became easy for the 
Congress party to profess love and admiration for Subhash 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji and Independence 93 


GAMI C EE 
Chandra Bose and the I.N.A. and even to defend some of 
its officers and men in the Great State Trial in 1946 in 
this very Red Fort. They even adopted ‘Jai Hind’ as the 
slogan which Subhash had introduced im the Far East. 
They traded on the name of Subhash and the I.N.A. The 
two issues which led them to victory during the election in 
1945-46 were their pretended affection for the I.N.A. and 
their hypocritical homage to Subhash’s memory. Moreover 
the Congress party had promised they were opposed to 
Pakistan and would resist it at all costs. On these two 
assurances, they treated the J.N.A. with scant courtesy 
and of course they succumbed to Pakistan in breach of 
their promise. O 

85. All this time the Muslim League was carrying 
on treasonable activities, disturbing the peace and 
tranquility of India carrying on a murderous campaign 
against the Hindus. Lord Wavell and Lord Mountbatten 
looked on entirely unconcerned. The Congress would not. 
venture to condemn or to stop these wholesale massacres 
in pursuit of its policy of appeasement at all costs. Gandhiji 
suppressed everything which did not fit in with his pattern 
of public activities. I am therefore surprised, when claims 
are made over and over again, that the winning of the 
freedom was due to Gandhiji. My own view is that constant 
pandering to the Muslim League was not the way to 
winning freedom. It only created a Frankenstein monster, 
which ultimately devoured its own creator swallowing one- 
third of Indian territory, and permanently stationing a 
hostile, censorious, unfriendly and aggressive neighbour 
on what was once Indian territory. About the winning of 
Swaraj and freedom, I maintain the Mahatama’s 
contribution was negligible. But I am prepared to give him 
a place as a sincere patriot. His teachings however have 
produced opposite result and his leadership has stultified 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


hy | Assassinated i 
Ar Why ssinated Gandhi 


he nation. In my opinion S.C. Bose is the supreme hero 
and martyr of modern India. He kept alive and fostered 
the revolutionary mentality of the masses, advocating all 
honourable means, including the use of force when 
necessary for the liberation of India. Gandhiji and his 
crowd of self-seekers tried to destroy him. It is thus entirely 
incorrect to represent the Mahatma as the architect of 
Indian Independence. 

86. The real cause of the British leaving this country 
is threefold and it does not include the Gandhian method. 
The aforesaid triple forces are— 

G) The movements of the Indian Revolutionaries right 
from 1857 to 1932, i.e. upto the death of Chandra Shekhar 
Azad at Allahabad. Next is the movement of revolutionary 
character not that of Gandhian type in the countrywide 
rebellion of 1942, but an armed revolt put up by Subhash 
Chandra Bose, the result of which, a spread of the 
revolutionary mentality in the Military Forces of India 
are the real dynamic factors that have shattered the very 
foundation of the British Rule in India. And all these 
effective efforts to freedom were opposed by Gandhiji. 


(ii) A good deal of credit must be given to those who, 
imbibed with a spirit of patriotism, fought with the 
Britishers strictly on constitutional lines on the Assembly 
floors and made a notable progress in Indian politics. The 
view of this section was to take a maximum advantage of 
whatever we have obtained and to fight further on! This 
section was generally represented by late Lokmanya Tilak, 
Mr. N.C. Kelkar, Mr. C.R. Das, Mr. Vithhalbhai Patel 
brother of Hon’ble Sardar Patel, Pandit Malviya, Bhai 
Parmanand, and during last ten years by prominent Hindu 
Sabha leaders. The sacrifices and intelligence of this school 
of men was also ridiculed by Gandhiji himself and his 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Gandhiji and Independence “E95 


followers by calling them as job hunters or power seekers. 
Although they often ultimately resorted to the same 
methods. 

(iii) There is also one more, but nonetheless important 
reason for the Britishers which made them part with 
power. That is the advent of Labour Government and an 
overthrow of Mr. Churchill, superimposed by the frightful 
economic conditions and the financial bankruptcy to which 
the war had reduced Britain. 


87. Solong as Gandhian method was in ascendance, 
frustration was the only inevitable result. He had 
throughout opposed every spirited revolutionary, radical 
and vigorous individual or group, and constantly boosted 
his charkha, non-violence and truth. The charkha after 
34 years of the best efforts of Gandhiji, had only led to the 
expansion of the machine-run textile industry by over 200 
per cent. It is unable even now to clothe even one per cent 
of the nation. As regards non-violence, it was absurd to 
expect 40 crores of people to regulate their lives on such a 
lofty plane and it broke down most conspicuously in 1942. 
As regards truth, the least I can say is that the truthfulness 
of the average Congressman is by no means of a higher 
order than that of the man in the street and that very 
often it is untruth in reality masked by a thin veneer of 
pretended truthfulness. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
96 


Apte, Veer Savarker, Nathuram, Vishnu Karkare (sitting 
from left to right) Kistya, Gopal Godse, Madan Lal, Badge 
(standing from left to right) 


An affidavit submitted by Savarkar in the Bombay 
High Court sites this picture as taken without his consent 
“ae on 11 May 1948. 
au 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


PART-IV 


FRUSTRATION OF AN IDEAL 


88. Really speaking the idea of Hindu-Muslim unity 
which Gandhiji had put forward when he entered Indian 
Politics, came to an end from the moment the Pakistan 
was established. The Muslim league was opposed to regard 
India as one whole nation; and over and over again they 
had stated with great obstinacy, that they were not 
Indians. The Hindu Muslim unity which Gandhiji himself 
had put forward many a time was not of this type. What 
he wanted was that they both should take part in the 
struggle for independence as comrades. That was his idea 
of Hindu-Muslim unity. The Hindus followed Gandhiji’s 
advice. The Muslims on every occasion, disregarded it and 
indulged in such behaviour as would be insulting to the 
Hindus, and at last, it has culminated in the vivisection 
and division of the country. 


89. The mutual relations of Gandhiji and Mr. Jinnah 
are also worthy of note. When Mr. Jinnah, who once was 
an ardent nationalist became rank communalist from 1920 
onward, since then he put forward one evident and clear 
fact that it was his intention to look to the interest of the 
Muslim community and that the Muslims should not at all 
rely upon the Congress and Congress leaders. The Muslims 


should not support the fight for freedom along with the _ 


Congress. Mr. Jinnah had also openly demanded Pakistan. 
He has preached these doctrines quite openly. He has 
deceived no one as far as principles are concerned. His the 


behaviour of an open enemy. He could talk of vivisecting _ 


this country with ease and wholly unfettered tongue. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


{OoOO 


à 


R- Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


~ 90, Gandhiji had seen and called upon Mr. Jinnag 
many a time. Every time he had to plead to him as “brother 
Jinnah’. He even offered to him the premiership of the 
whole of India; but there was, not a single occasion on 
which Mr. Jinnah had shown any inclination even to co- 
operate. 

91. Gandhiji’s inner voice, his spiritual power and 
his doctrine of non-violence of which so much is made of, 
crumbled before Mr. Jinnah’s iron will and proved to be 
powerless. 
~ 92. Having known that with his spiritual powers he 
could not influence Mr. Jinnah, Gandhiji should have 
either changed his policy or admitted his defeat and given 
way to others of different political views to deal with Mr. 
Jinnah and the Muslim League. But Gandhiji was not 
honest enough to do that. He could not forget his egoism 
or self, even for national interest. There was, thus, no scope 
left for the practical politics while the great blunders— 
blunders as big as the Himalayas—were being committed. 


93. Constantly for nearly one year after the horrible 
Noakhali massacre, our nation was, as if, bathing in the 
pool of blood. The Muslims indulged in horrible and 
dreadful massacre of humanity followed by reactions from 
Hindus in some parts. The attacks of Hindus on Muslims 
in the East Punjab, Bihar or Delhi, were simply acts of 
reaction. It is not that Gandhiji did not know that the 
basic cause of these reactions was the outrages on Hindus 
by the Muslims in the Muslim majority Provinces. But 
still Gandhiji went on condemning strongly such actions 
of Hindus only, and the Congress Government went to 
the extent of threatening to even bombard the Hindus in 
Bihar to check their discontent and reactions against 
Muslims which was mainly due to the Muslim outbursts 

and atrocities in Noakhali and elsewhere. Gandhiji had 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Frustration of an Ideal Sa 


Hindus in India should treat the Muslims with respect 
and generosity even though the Hindus and Sikhs in 
Pakistan may be completely massacred, and though Mr. 
Suhrawardy may be the leader of the goondas, he should 
be allowed to move about freely and safely in Delhi. This 
will be evident from extracts given below from Gandhiji’s 
post-prayer speeches: 


(a) We should with a cool mind reflect when we are being 
swept away. Hindus should never be angry against the 
- Muslims even if the latter might make up their minds to 
undo even their existence. If they put all of us to the 
sword, we should court death bravely, may they, even 
rule the world, we shall inhabit the world. At least we 
should never fear death. We are destined to be born and 
die; then why need we feel gloomy over it. ‘If all of us die 
with a smile on our lips, we shall enter a new life: We 
shall originate a new Hindustan’. (6th April 1947). 


(b) The few gentlemen from Rawalpindi who called upon 
me today were sturdy, brave and absorbed in business. I 
advised them to remain calm. After all God is great. There 
is no place where God does not exist. Mediate on Him and 
take His name; everything will be all right. They asked 
me what about those who still remained in Pakistan. I 
asked them why they came here (in Delhi). Why they did 
not die there? I still hold on to the belief one should stick 
to the place where we happen to give even if we are 

cruelly treated and even killed. Let us die if the people 
‘kill us; but we should die bravely with the name of God 
on our tongue. Even if our men are killed, why should 
we feel angry with anybody, you should realise that even 
if they are killed they have had a good and proper end. 
May the heaven make us all so. May God send us the 
‘Same way. This is what we should pray heartily for. I 
will advise you (and issue) as I did to the residents of 
Rawalpindi, that they should go there and meet the Sikhs 
and Hindu refugees, tell them politely to return to their 
Places in Pakistan unaided either by Police or the 


Military’. (23rd September 1947). 
CC-0. Nanaji péshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


100 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


return. In the end we too have to go there. It is true that 
they were murdered but then some others die of cholera 
or due to others causes. He who is born must die. If thoge 
killed have died bravely they have not lost anything but 
earned something. But what to do with those who have 
slaughtered people, is a big question. One may concede 
that to err is human. A human being isa bundle of errors, 
In Punjab our protection is due to them (British troops). 

‘ Butis this protection? I want even if a handful of persons 
protect themselves, they should not be afraid of death. 
After all the killers will be none other than our Muslim 
brothers. Will our brothers cease to be our brothers after 
change of their religion? And do we not act like them? 
What thing we left undone with women in Bihar.’ 

94. Gandhiji needs have taken into consideration 
‘that the desire for reprisals springing up in the Hindu 
mind was simply a natural reaction. Thousands of Hindus : 
in the Muslim Provinces were being massacred simply 
because of the fault of their being Hindus, and our 

Government was quite unable to render these unfortunate 

people any help or protection. Could it be in any way 

unnatural if the waves of sorrow and grief of the Hindus 
in those Provinces should redound on the mind and hearts 
of the Hindus in other Provinces? It was not at all 
unnatural, for these reactions were only the signs of warm 
humanity. Only with the sole object of redressing the woes 
and calamities of their fellow brothers in those provinces’ 
and giving them protection, that the retaliation against 
the Muslims was resorted to, as the Hindus believed that 
wás the only way by which the atrocities of the Muslims 
could be’checked. Wheri-the people (Hindus) noticed and 
#ealised that the Indian Union Government was unable 
i afford any ‘pfotection to their. brethren residing in 
_ PèKjgtan, they thought of taking ’the-law:in their ow” 
Hasigg. Whe Fels Ane eben the Hindus 1m 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri J 


Frustration of an Ideal 101 


Bihar and elsewhere were the inevitable outcome of the 
revulsion left by the Hindus at the shocking atrocities in 
other provinces. Such a feeling at times also is as spiritual 
and natural as that of kindness. 


95. Many a great revolution has been successful only 
by the idea of this sort of feeling of acute discontent against 
the misdeeds of the rulers. It would be quite impossible to 
put an end to the governance of the Society by the wicked, 
had it not been for such feelings of discontent, retaliation 
and revenge springing up against the wicked Dictators. 
The events of ancient history as depicted in Ramayana 
and Mahabharat, or the more modern wars of England 
and America against Germany and Japan do indicate the 
same sort of action and reaction. It may be either good or 
bad, but such is the human nature. 


96. Looking at from the point of view of the Indian 
politics, I have already shown in my narration elsewhere, 
how Gandhiji had strongly opposed several efforts made 
for winning the freedom of the country. There was no 
consistency in his own political policy in particular, or in 
his behaviour at the time of the last war was quite 
unthinkable. 


97. He first gave out the principle that no help should 
be given by India to the war between England and 
Germany. ‘WAR MEANT VIOLENCE AND HOW COULD 
I HELP’ was the saying. But the wealthy companions and 
followers of Gandhiji enormously added to their wealth 
by undertaking contracts from the Government for the 
supply of materials for war. It is needless for me to mention 

. names but all know the wealthy personalities like Birla, 
Dalmia, Walchand Hirachand, Nanjibhai Kalidas, etc. 
Gandhiji and his Congress colleagues have been much 
helped by everyone of them. Gandhiji never refused to 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


F Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


accept the money offered by these wealthy-people although 
it was obtained from this blood-filled war. Nor did he 
prevent these wealthy people from carrying out their 
contracts with the Government for the supply of the 
materials for war. Not only that, Gandhiji had given his 
consent to taking up the contract for supplying blankets 
to the army from the Congress Khadi Bhandar. 

98. Gandhiji’s release from jail in 1944 was followed 
by the release of other leaders also, the Government had 
to be assured by the Congress leaders of their help in the 
war against Japan. Gandhiji not only did not oppose this 
but actually supported the Government proposal. 

99. In Gandhiji’s politics, there was no place for 
consistency of ideas and reasons. Truth was what Gandhiji 
only could define. His politics was supported by old > 
superstitious beliefs such as the power of the soul, the inner 
voice, the fast, the prayer, and the purity of mind. 

100. Gandhiji had once said: 


Freedom Got from Non-violence A Thousand Years 
Later, Is Preferable to the Freedom got today by Violence. 


Whether he acted as he said, or whether his actions 
and sayings were diametrically opposed to each other can 
be inferred to some extent from the example cited above. 


101. A recent example of the inconsistency of his 
i doctrine of non-violence is worth being noted in particular 


ne partiality 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by ¢Gangoftri 


Frustration of an Ideal - 103 


being done, Kashmir being the birth-place of Pt. Nehru. 
And to give no way to this partiality, Pt. Nehru consulted 
Gandhiji about sending Military help to Kashmir and it 
was only on the consent of Gandhiji that Pt. Nehru sent 
troops for the protection and defence of Kashmir. Pandit 
Nehru himself has told this in one of his speeches. 

102. Our political leaders knew from the very 
beginning that the invasion of Kashmir by the raiders was 
supported by Pakistan. And it was therefore, evident that 
sending help to the Kashmir meant waging war directly 
against Pakistan. Gandhiji himself was opposed to the war 
with arms, and he has told this to the entire world again 
and again. But he gave his consent to Pt. Nehru to send 
army in Kashmir. The only conclusion that could be drawn 
from what is happening in Kashmir is that, today after 
the attainment of freedom for the partitioned India, that 
under Gandhiji’s blessings, our Government has resorted 
to the war where man-killing machinery is being used. 


103. Had Gandhiji a firm belief in the doctrine of 
non-violence, he should have made a suggestion for sending 
Satyagrahis instead of the armed troops and tried the 
experiment. Orders should have been issued to send 

` ‘Takalis’ in place of rifles and ‘Spinning wheels’ (t.e. - 
‘ Charkhas) instead of the guns. It was a golden opportunity 
for Gandhiji to show the power of his Satyagraha by 
following his precept as an experiment at the beginning of 
_ our freedom. ý j 
104. But Gandhiji did nothing of the sort. He had 
begun a new war by his own will, at the very beginning of 
the existence of Free India. What does this inconsistency 
mean? Why did Gandhiji himself so violently trample down. 
the doctrine of non-violence, he had championed? To my 
mind, the reason for his doing so is quite obvious; and it is 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ce Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


that this war is being fought for Sheikh Abdullah. The 
administrative power of Kashmir was going in the hands 
of Muslims and for this reason and this reason alone diq 
Gandhiji consent to the destruction of the raiders by Armed 
Forces. Gandhiji was reading the dreadful news of Kashmir 
war, while at the same time fasting to death only becauge 
a few Muslims could not live safely in Delhi. But he was 
not bold enough to go on fast in front of the raiders of 
Kashmir, nor had he the courage to practise Satyagraha 
against them. All his fasts were to coerce Hindus. 


‘105. I thought it is rather a very unfortunate thing, 
that in the present 20th Century such a hypocrite should 
have been regarded as the leader of the All India politics. 
The mind of this Mahatma was not affected by the attacks 
on the Hindus in Hyderabad State. This Mahatma never 
asked the Nizam of Hyderabad to abandon his throne. If 
the Indian politics proceeded in this way under the guiding 
dominance of Gandhiji, even the preservation of freedom 
obtained today—even in partitioned India would be 
impossible. These thoughts arose in my mind again and 
again and it was full with them. As the above incidents 
were taking place, Gandhiji’s fast for the Hindu-Muslim 
unity was announced on 13th January 1948, and then I 
lost nearly all my control on my feelings. 


106. For the last four years, I had been working as 
the Editor of a daily newspaper, and even before this 
period, I have spent most of my time in the service of the 
public. As such therefore, I was in a habit of being in touch 
with all the Indian political developments. 


107. I was fully aware of the idea of the mutual 
relations among the three political bodies—the Muslim 
League, the Congress and the Hindu Mahasabha. The 
Muslim League had always: dubbed the Congress as a 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Frustration of an Ideal = 105 


Hindu organisation, but the Congress leaders were 
ashamed of being called part of a Hindu body. The 
Congressmen felt abused when called ‘Communal’. 


108. Really speaking, if any institution were to look 
to the interests of a particular community without 
hindering the growth of national spirit, why should one 
use the word ‘communal’ in the sense of an abuse to that 
institution? It would be proper if an institution seeking 
the interests of any particular community by destroying 
the very essence of the national spirit were to be abused 
as being a selfish ‘Communal minded’ body. But the 
Congress has no such discretion. The Congress has styled 
both the Muslim League and the Hindu Mahasabha as 
‘Communal bodies’ using the word ‘Communal’ as an 
expression of abuse. But the thing to be specially noted is 
that while the Congress has yielded to every demand of 
the Muslim League, it has not taken due notice of even 
the purely national policy of the Hindu Mahasabha and 
has carried on propaganda of distortion against Hindu 
Mahasabha and its leaders. 

109. When the Congress recognised the Muslim 
League as representing the Muslim Community viewed 
from logical point of view it would not have been out of 
place to recognise the Hindu Mahasabha as representing 
the Hindus, or, at least the Congress should openly have 
declared that it would look to the interests of the Hindus. 
But the Congress never did that. As a result of all this, in 
spite of the existence of a very powerful body such as the 
Muslim League looking after the interests of the Muslims, 
afew Muslims who were still the members of the Congress, 
also looked after the Muslim interest; whereas there was 
none to look after the Hindu interest as such. The Congress 
which derided the Hindu Mahasabha by calling it 
‘Communal’ took part in the conference of leaders convened 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


106 ¥° : Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


by H.E. Lord Wavell at Simla, and accepted the principle 
of 50 per cent representation of the Muslims. Not only 
that, but at the instance of Gandhiji the Congress leaders 
were prepared to be recognised as representatives of Caste 
Hindus. This position taken by the Congress was the most 
hideously communal one being entirely the outcome of the 
Muslim-appeasing policy adopted by it. 

110. Was the ideal of freedom and independence of 
India, torn by vivisection, before the Congress, on the 
foundation of which our great national, intelligent and 
sacrificing leaders laboured assiduously by keeping before 
them the ideal of the freedom of the whole nation, sacrificed 
even their lives for their ideal of the achievement of 
complete democracy, and tried for the mutual co-operation 
among the major and minor communities of this vast 
country and in the freedom fight of which the parts of 
Punjab, Bengal, Sind, and N.W.F. Province, which now 
form the Pakistan, were in no way less prominent than 
any other part of India? So also, could those patriots with 
their ideal of the freedom of the whole of Bharatkhand, 
who were, though outside the Congress, but were in the 
forefront of the revolution who either gladly went to the 
gallows or passed their days out of their motherland as 
exiles, or were rotting in the dark cells of the Andamans; 
dream of freedom as envisaged in the freedom granted to 
the country by vivisection? Is it proper that the reward for 
their incomparable Sacrifices should be in the 
establishment of a State founded upon blind and fanatic 

religious faith in one part of the country? 


111. But the Congress under the leadership of 
‘Gandhiji commenced its Surrender to the Muslims, right 
from the time the 14 demands of Mr. Jinnah were made 
till the establishment of the Pakistan. Isit nota deplorable 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Frustration of an Ideal “¥ 107 
EE L Y 


sight for people to see the Congress celebrate the occasion 
_ of the establishment of a Dominion Government in the 
rest of country shattered and vivisected by the Pakistan 
in the East and West and with the pricking thorn of 
Hyderabad in its midst. On seeing this downfall of the 
Congress under the dominance of Gandhiji, lam reminded 
of the well known verse of Raja Bhartrihari to the effect: 


Rr: wre camnicagafa freer: AR 
Teg uses TAY VATA 
AA Te Fa Ve Shae 
fader ert safe fafaa: waga: 
(ageft: fa waa A) 
(The Ganges has fallen from the Heavens.on the head 
of Shiva, thence on the Himalayas, thence on the earth, 
and thence in the sea. In this manner, down and down she 
went and reached a very low stage. Truly it is said that 


indiscriminate persons deteriorate to the low position in a 
hundred ways.) 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


408 F Why | sasona Gandhi ; 


Seen in the Picture is Judge Atma Charan (in circle), Vishnu 
Karkare, Narayan Apte, Nathuram Godse, Gopal Godse, 


Veer Savarkar, etc. 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


PART-V 
Climax of Anti-national Appeasement 


112. The day on which I decided to remove Gandhiji 
from the political stage, it was clear to me that personally 
I shall be lost to everything that could be mine. I am nota 
moneyed person but I did have a place of honour and 
respect amongst those known as middle class society. I 
have been in the public life of my Province and the service 
that I have been able to render so far has given me a place 
of honour and respect amongst my people. Ideas of culture 
and civilisation are not strange to me. I had in my view 
before me some schemes of constructive work to be taken 
in hand in my future life and I felt I had enough strength 
and enthusiasm to undertake them and carry them out 
successfully. I have maintained robust health and I do 
not suffer from any bodily defect and I am not addicted to 
any vice. Although I myself am not a much-learned man, 
I have a great regard and admiration for the learned. 


113. Since the year 1929-30 when the Congress 
launched its first campaign of the Civil Disobedience 
Movement, I entered the life of a public worker. I was 
merely a student then: The lectures related to this 
movement and the accounts thereof published in the 
newspapers had greatly impressed me and I resolved to 
join the movement and take the career of a public worker. 
Just after this, the movement was over the problems 
related to Muslims assumed grave appearance anda 
-movement to bring about the unification of the Hindus 
was being taken in hand more intensely, by the Hindu 
Sabha leaders like Dr. Moonje, Bhai Parmanandji, Pandit 
Madan Mohan Malaviya as also by some leaders of the 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


110° Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


Arya Samaj and by the workers of the Rashtriya Swayam 
Sevak Sangh. The question of Communal Award was 
under hot discussion amongst all the political bodies and 
it is also noteworthy to mention here that in the Session 
of the Hindu Mahasabha which was held at Poona in the 
year 1935, it was decided to contest the elections for 
legislatures against the Congress as the views of the latter 
were unfairly in favour of the Muslims and detrimental to 
the Hindus. This contest against the Congress was decided 
by the Hindu Mahasabha under the auspices of the late 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya who was also a veteran 
leader of the Congress. 
114. About the year 1932 late Dr. Hedgewar of 
Nagpur founded the Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh in 
Maharashtra. His oration greatly impressed me and I 
joined the Sangha as a volunteer thereof. I am one of those 
volunteers of Maharashtra who joined the Sangha in its 
initial stage. I also worked for a few years on the 
intellectual side in the Province of Maharashtra. Having 
worked for the upliftment of the Hindus I felt it necessary 
to take part in the political activities of the country for the 
protection of the just rights of Hindus. I therefore left the 
Sangha and joined the Hindu Mahasabha. 


115. In the year 1938, I led the first batch of 
volunteers who marched into the territory of the 
Hyderabad State when the passive resistance movement 
was started by the Hindu Mahasabha, with a demand for 
Responsible Government in the State. I was arrested and 
sentenced to one year’s imprisonment. I have a personal 
experience of the uncivilized, nay barbarous rule of 
Hyderabad, and have undergone the corporal punishment 
of dozens of cane lashes for the offence of singing the Vande. ' 
Mataram’ song at the time of prayer. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement “111 


116. In the year 1943 the Bihar Government had. 
_ issued a proclamation prohibiting the holding of the Hindu 
Mahasabha Session at Bhagalpur. The Mahasabha 
resolved to defy this ban as it felt that the action of the 
Government was unjust and illegal. The session was held 
in spite of all the precautions taken by the Government 
for its prevention. I took a leading part in the preparation 
for the session keeping myself underground for nearly a 
month. During this period while reading newspapers I 
have come across items of news appreciating my work, I 
have also heard people expressing their approval of my 
part in public life. By nature I am not a person of violent 
temperament. The approver Badge in his deposition at 
page 225 has stated that I took out a knife to stab Mr. 
Bhopatkar. This statement is totally false. Mr. Bhopatkar 
is at present leading the lawyers defending the accused. 
Had I made any such assault as described by the approver 
could he have come forward to render us assistance in our 
defence? If that alleged incident were true, I should have 
least thought of taking the help of Mr. Bhopatkar. 


117. Those, who personally know me, take me asa 
person of quiet temperament. But when the top-rank 
leaders of the Congress with the consent of Gandhiji 
divided and tore the country—which we consider as a deity 
of worship—my mind became full with the thoughts of 
direful anger. 


I wish to make it clear that I am not an enemy of the 
Congress. I have always regarded that body as the premier 
institution which has worked for the political uplift of the 
country. I had, and have, my differences with its leaders. 
This will be clearly seen from my letter addressed to Veer 
Savarkar on 28th February 1938 (RX D/80) which is in 
my hand and signed by me and I admit its contents. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


n2 r Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


118. There was no enmity between Gandhiji and 
myself on any personal grounds. To those who speak of 
Gandhiji’s honest motive in supporting Pakistan, I have 
only to say that I have nothing but the purest interest of 
our nation at my heart in taking the extreme step against 
the person of Gandhiji, who was the most responsible and 
answerable person for the terrible event culminating in 
the creation of Pakistan. I could foresee the result of my 
action against the life of Gandhiji and did very well realise 
that the moment the people come to know about it they 
would change their view about me in spite of the 
circumstances. My status and honour in the society and 
the sympathies which the people entertained for me will 
be smashed completely. I fully realised that I would be 

looked upon as the most despicable fellow in the society. 


119. Ihad a fare idea about fiery attacks that would 
be launched against me in the Press. But I never thought 
that I could be cowed down by the fire poured against me 
by the Press. For, had the Indian Press impartially - 
criticised the anti-national policy carried on by Gandhiji 
and had they impressed upon the people that the interest 

- of the nation was far greater than the whim of any 
individual howsoever great he may be, Gandhiji and his 
followers could never have dared concede Pakistan to the 
Muslims as easily as has been done. The Press had 
displayed such weakness and submission to the High 
Command of the Congress that it allowed the mistakes of 
leaders pass away freely and unnoticed and made 
vivisection easy by their policy. The fear about such 
Press—weak and subservient as it was—could not 

therefore dislodge me from my resolve. . 


. ‘120. It is stated in some quarters that the people 
could:not have got the independence unless Pakistan was 


conceded, But I took it to be an utterly incorrect and untrue 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmuf Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement 113 


view. To me it appears to be merely a poor excuse to justify 
the action taken by the leaders. The leaders of the 
Gandhian creed often claim to have conquered ‘Swarajya’ 
by their struggle. If they had conquered Swarajya, then it 
would be clearly seen that it is most ridiculous to say that 
those Britishers who yielded, were in a position to lay down 
the condition of Pakistan before the grant of independence 
could be effective. To my mind there could be only one 
reason for Gandhiji and his followers to give their consent 
to the creation of Pakistan and it is that these people were 
accustomed to make a show of hesitation and resistance 
in the beginning and ultimately to surrender to the Muslim 
demands. 


121. Pakistan was conceded on the 15th of August 
1947, and how? Pakistan was conceded by deceiving the 
people and without any consideration for the feelings and 
opinions of the people- of Punjab, Bengal, N.W.F. Province, 
Sind, etc. Indivisible Bharat was divided into two and in 
one of its parts a theocratic State was established. The 
Muslims obtained the fruit of their anti-national 
movements and actions in the shape of Pakistan. The 
leaders of the Gandhian creed ridiculed the opponents of 
Pakistan as traitors and communal minded, while they 
themselves helped in the establishment of a Muslim State 
in India yielding to the demands of Mr. Jinnah. This event 
of Pakistan had upset the tranquility of my mind. But 
even after the establishment of Pakistan if this Gandhian 
Government had taken any steps to protect the interests 
of Hindus in Pakistan it could have been possible for me 
to control my mind which was terribly shaken on account 
of this terrible deception of the people. But, after handing 
over crores of Hindus to the mercy of the Muslims. of 
Pakistan, Gandhiji and his followers have been advising 
them not to leave Pa Li stan, hut. continue to ENAN E The 


bie Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


Hindus thus were caught in the hands of Muslim 
authorities quite unaware and in such circumstances series 
of calamities followed one after the other. When I bring to 
my mind all these happenings my body simply feels a 
horror of burning fire, even now. 

122. Every day that dawned, brought forth the news 
about thousands of Hindus being massacred, Sikhs 
numbering 15,000 having been shot dead, hundreds of 
women torn of their clothes being made naked and taken 
“into procession and that Hindu women were being soldin 
the market places like cattle. Thousands and thousands 
of Hindus had to run away for their lives and they had 
lost everything of theirs. A long line of refugees extending 
over the length of 40 miles was moving towards the Indian 
Union. How was this terrible happening being counter- 
acted by the Union Government? Oh, by throwing bread 
to the refugees from the air! 

123. These atrocities and the blood-bath would have, 
to some extent been checked if the Indian Government 
had lodged strong protests against the treatment meted 
out to the Minorities in Pakistan or even if a cold threat 
had been held out, the Muslims in India being treated in 
the same manner as a measure of retaliation. But the 
Government which was under the thumb of Gandhiji 
resorted to absolutely different ways. If the grievances of 
the minorities in Pakistan were voiced in the Press, it was 
dubbed as an attempt to spread disaffection amongst the 
communities and made an offence and the Congress 
Government in several Provinces started demanding 
securities under the Press Emergency Powers Act, one 
after the other. Iwas alone served with notices demanding 

securities to the extent of Rs. 16,000/- and in the Bombay 
Province alone nearly 900 such cases have occurred, as is 


stated, by the, Home Member, MrMeraxibhaigiesai in 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement 115 


this Court. Nothing was döne to redress the grievances of 
the Press even though Press deputations waited upon the 
Ministers. Thus there was total disappointment in my 
attempt to bring pressure by peaceful means upon the 
Congress Governments guided by Gandhian creed. 

124. When all these happenings were taking place in 
Pakistan, Gandhiji did not even by a single word protest 
and censure to the Pakistan Government or the Muslims 
concerned. The Muslim atrocities resorted to in Pakistan’ 
to root out the Hindu culture and the Hindu society, have 
been entirely due to the teachings of Gandhiji and his 
behaviour. If the Indian politics had been handled in a 
practical manner there would never have been the terrible 
human slaughter as has taken place—a thing without any 
precedent in History. 


125. The most noticeable and important thing is that 
Gandhiji never cared for the opinion of the people so far 
as Muslims were concerned. His theme of non-violence had 
now been deeply soaked in human blood and it was 
impossible for people to entertain any idea in favour of 
Pakistan. So long as there is a theocratic State and 
Government by the side of Indian Union, the peace and 
tranquility of the Union shall ever remain in danger. But 
in spite of all these facts, Gandhiji had taken in his hand 
the task of a propaganda which even in the staunchest 
adherent of the Muslim League would scarcely have been 
able to do for stopping the spread of unfavourable opinion 
about Pakistan in the minds of the people. 


126. About this very time he resorted to his last fast 
unto death. Every condition given by him for giving up 
the fast was in favour of Muslims and against the Hindus. 

127. One of the seven conditions imposed by Gandhiji 
for the breakingziofelnefastaus2¢8, GSTeh PETAR Gye He 


116 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


mosques in Delhi occupied by the refugees. This conditig, 
was to the effect that all the mosques in Delhi which Were 
occupied by the refugees should be vacated or got vacated 
and be made over to the Muslims. Gandhiji got this 
condition accepted by the Government and a number of 
leaders by sheer coercion brought to bear upon them by 
his fast. On that day I happened to be in Delhi and I haye 
personally seen some of the events that have occurred in 
getting this condition carried out to its full. Those were 
the days of bitter or extreme cold and on the day Gandhiji 
broke his fast it was also raining. Owing to this unusual 
weather condition, the pricking atmosphere made even 
person in well-placed position shiver. Families after 
families of refugees who had come to Delhi for shelter were 
driven out and while doing so no provision was made for 
their shelter and stay. One or two families taking with 
them their children, women-folk and what little belongings 
they had w ith them and saying: ‘Gandhiji, do give usa 
place for shelter’ even approached to Birla House. Was it 
ever possible for the cries of these poor Hindu people to 
reach Gandhiji living in the palatial Birla House? I 
witnessed with my own eyes this scene which would have 
melted the heart of even a hard-hearted person. But 
thoughts even deeper than this began to come to my mind. 
Was it out of fun that the refugees found these mosques to 
be better than their own houses from which they were 
ousted? Was not Gandhiji aware of the reasons ani 
_ circumstances that compelled the refugees to occupy the 
mosques? No Temple and no Gurudwara exists in the pat! 
of the country that has become Pakistan. These refuge® 
had seen with their own eyes, their temples and 
Gurudwaras being desecrated by filthy use made of the” 
simply for the purpose of insulting the Sikhs and Hindus 
The refuges had come—fled to Delhi having had to leav? 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement “Hy 117 
bna ee ee a 


everything belonging to them and there was no place of 
shelter fo? them in Delhi. What wonderful thing there could 

be if the refugees brought to their minds again and again 

their own hearths and homes in the Punjab and N.W.F. 

Province while they were either taking shelter at the sides 

of the streets or under a tree some how? It was under such 

circumstances that these refugees had resorted to and 

occupied the mosques? They were living under the roof in ' 
mosques and in doing so, were not these mosques being 

used for the benefit of humanity? While Gandhiji created 

the conditions of evacuating the refugees from the mosques 

occupied by them; had he also asked the Government and 

the people concerned, to provide some alternative 

arrangement for their shelter, before getting the mosques 

evacuated. It would have shown some human touch in his 

demand. While Gandhiji made a demand for the 

evacuation of the mosques by the refugees; had he also 

demanded that the temples in Pakistan should be handed 
over to the Hindus by the Muslims, or some other similar 

condition. That would have shown. That Gandhiji’s 

teaching of non-violence, his anxiety for Hindu-Muslim 

unity and his belief in soul force had been taken or 
understood as being impartial, spirited and non- 
communal. Gandhiji was shrewd enough to know that 
while undertaking a fast unto death, had he imposed such 
condition on the Muslims in Pakistan, there would have 
hardly been any Muslim found who could have shown some 
grief if the fast ended in the death of Gandhiji. It was for 
this reason that he purposely avoided imposing any 
condition on the Muslims. It was clearly in his past 
experience that Mr. Jinnah was not at all perturbed or 
influenced by his fast and that the Muslim League hardly 
attached any value to the ‘Inner Voice’ of Gandhiji. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


118 F Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


128. It would not be out of place to state here that 
the remains (ashes) of Gandhiji were distributed in lar 
towns and many rivers in India and abroad but the Said 
ashes could not be immersed in the Holy Indus passing 
through the Pakistan in spite of the endeavours of Shri 
Shree Prakash, the Indian High Commissioner iņ 
Pakistan. 

129. Let us then take the case of 55 crores. Here, | 
read from the Indian Information dated 2nd February 

1948 the following extracts: 

1. Extracts from the speech of the Honourable Sardar 
Vallabhai Patel at the press conference held on 12th 
January, 1948. ; 

2. Extract from the speech of the Honourable Sir 
Shanmukham Chetty. 

3. India’s spontaneous gesture of goodwill, and 

4. An extract from the Honourable Prime Minister’s 
statement. 

Gandhiji himself has said about these 55 crores thatit 
is always very difficult to make any Government to alter 
its decision. But the Government have altered and changed 
their original decision of withholding the payment of Rs. 
55 crores to Pakistan and the reason for doing so was the 
fast unto death, (Gandhiji’s sermon at Prayer-Meeting held 
on or about the 21st of January 1948). The decision to 
with-hold the payment of Rs. 55 crores to Pakistan was 
taken up by our Government which claims to be the 
people’s Government. But this decision of the people's 
Government was reversed to suit the tune of Gandhiji’s 
fast. It was evident to me that the force of public opinion 
was nothing but a trifle when compared with the leanings 
of Gandhiji favouring to Pakistan. 


130. The creation of Pakistan is the result of the 
Muslim hostility to the national movement of India. A 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement = 119 
eee ee ee ene a tec ae 


number of people who showed their allegiance to Pakistan 
have been clapped in jail as fifth columnists by this very 
Government. But to my mind Gandhiji himself was the 
greatest supporter and advocate of Pakistan and no power 
could have any control on him in this attitude of his. 


131. In these circumstances the only effective remedy 
to relieve the Hindus from the Muslim atrocities was, to 
my mind, to remove Gandhiji from this world. 


132. Gandhiji is being referred as the Father of the 
Nation—an epithet of high reverence. If so, he has failed 
in his paternal duty in as much as he has acted very 
treacherously to the nation by his consenting to the. 
partitioning of it. Had Gandhiji really maintained his 
opposition to the creation of Pakistan, the Muslim League 
could have had no strength to claim it and the Britishers 
also could not have created it in spite of all their utmost 
efforts for its establishment. The reason for this is not far 
to seek. The people of this country were eager and 
vehement in their opposition to Pakistan. But Gandhiji 
played false with the people and gave parts of the country 
to the Muslims for the creation of Pakistan. I stoutly 
maintain that Gandhiji in doing so has failed in his duty 
which was incumbent upon him to carry out, as the Father 
of the Nation. He has proved to be the Father of Pakistan. 
It was for this reason alone that I as a dutiful son of Mother 
India thought it my duty to put an end to the life of the so- 
called Father of the Nation, who had played a very 
prominent part in bringing about the vivisection of the 
country—Our Motherland. 


133. The case of Hyderabad has also the same history, 
it is not at all necessary to refer to the trocious misdeeds 
perpetrated by the Nizam’s Ministers and the Razakars. 
Laik Ali the Prime Minister of Hyderabad had an interview 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


120 ¥ Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


with Gandhiji during the last week of January 1948. I; 
was evident from the manner in which Gandhiji looked at 
these Hyderabad affairs, that Gandhiji would soon start 
his experiments of non-violence in the State of Hyderabaq 
and treat Kasim Razvi as his adopted son just ag: 
Suhrawardy. It was not at all difficult to see that it was 
impossible for the Government in spite of all the powers 
to take any strong measures against the Muslim State 
like Hyderabad so long as Gandhiji was there. Had the 
Government then decided to take any military or police 
action against Hyderabad it would have been compelled 
to withdraw its decision just as it was done in the case of 
the payment of Rs. 55 crores in the name of Hindu-Muslim 
unity, for Gandhiji would have gone on fast unto death 
and Government's hands would have been tied to save 
the life of Gandhiji. 

134. The practice of non-violence according to Gandhiji 
is to endure or put up with the blows of the aggressor 
without showing any resistance either by weapon or by 
physical force, Gandhiji has, while describing his non- 
violence given the example of a ‘tiger becoming a follower 
of the creed of non-violence after the cows allowed 
themselves to be killed and swallowed in such large 
numbers that the tiger ultimately got tired of killing them.’ 
It will be remembered that at Kanpur, Ganesh Shanker 

_ Vidyarthi fell a victim to the murderous assault by the 
Muslims of the place on him. Gandhiji has often cited this 
submission to the Muslims’ blows as an ideal example of 
embracing death for the creed of nonviolence I firmly 
believed and believe that the nonviolence of the type 
described above will lead the nation to ruin and make it 
easy for Pakistan to enter the remaining India and occupy 
the same. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement “S121 
SAAN TION USS Oro A 


135. Briefly speaking, I thought over and foresaw 
that I shall be totally ruined and the only thing that I 
could expect from the people would be nothing but hatred 
and that I shall have lost all my honour even more valuable 
than my life, if I were to kil Gandhiji. But at the same 
time I felt that the Indian politics in the absence of 
Gandhiji would surely be practical, able to retaliate, and 
would be powerful with armed forces. No doubt my own 
future would be totally ruined but the nation would be 
saved from the inroads of Pakistan. People may even call 
and dub me as devoid of any sense or foolish, but the nation 
would be free to follow the course founded on reason which 
I consider to be necessary for sound nation building. After 
having fully considered the question, I took the final 
decision in the matter but I did not speak about it to any 
one whatsoever. I took courage in my both hands and I 
did fire the shots at Gandhiji on 30th January, 1948 on 
the prayer grounds in Birla House. 


136. There now remains hardly anything for me to 
say. If devotion to one’s country amounts to a sin, I admit 
I have committed that sin. If it is meritorious, I humbly 
claim the merit thereof. I fully and confidently believe that 
if there be any other court of justice beyond the one founded 
by the mortals, my act will not be taken as unjust. If after 
the death there be no such place to reach or to go, there is 
nothing to be said. I have resorted to the action I did purely 
for the benefit of the humanity. I do say that my shots 
were fired at the person whose policy and action had 
brought wrack and ruin and destruction to lakhs of Hindus. 


137. Really speaking, my life also came to an end 
simultaneously with the shots fired by me at Gandhiji. 
Since then I have been passing my days as if in trance 
and meditation. Whatever I have seen and observed during 
this time has given me complete satisfaction. 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


g Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


CO a a a a a O 
138. The problem of the State of Hyderabad which 
had been unnecessarily delayed and postponed has been 
rightly. solved by our Government by the use of armed 
force after the demise of Gandhiji. The present Government 
of the remaining India is seen taking the course of practical 
politics. The Home Member is said to have expressed the 
view that the nation must be possessed of armies fully 
equipped with modern arms and fighting machinery. While 
giving out such expressions he does say that such a step 
would be in keeping with the ideals of Gandhiji. He may 
say so for his satisfaction. But one must not forget that if 
that were so there would be no difference in the means for 
the protection of the country devised by Hitler, Mussolini 
or Churchill or Roosevelt and the scheme based on non- 
violence as envisaged by Gandhiji. It would then be 
impossible to say that there was any new and special 
message of non-violence of Gandhiji. 


139. Iam prepared to concede that Gandhiji did 
undergo sufferings for the sake of the nation. He did bring 
about an awakening in the minds of the people. He also 
did nothing for personal gain, but it pains me to say that 
he was not honest enough to acknowledge the defeat and 
failure of the principle of non-violence on all sides. I have 
read the lives of other intelligent and powerful Indian 
patriots who have made sacrifices even greater than those 
done by Gandhiji. I have even seen personally some of 
them. But whatever that may be, I shall bow in respect of 
the service done by Gandhiji to the country, and to Gandhiji 
himself for the said service and before I fired the shots I 
actually wished him and bowed to him in reverence. But! 

do maintain that even this servant of the country had n0 
right to vivisect the country—the image of our worship— 
by deceiving the people. But he did it all the same. There 
was no legal machinery by which such an offender could 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


— - 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement 123 


be brought to book and it was therefore that I resorted to 
the firing of shots at Gandhiji as that was the only thing 
for me to do. 


140. Had this act not been done by me, of course it 
would have been better for me. But circumstances were 
beyond my control. So strong was the impulse of my mind 
that I felt that this man should not be allowed to meet a 
natural death so that the world may know that he had to 
pay the penalty of his life for his unjust, anti-national and 
dangerous favouritism towards a fanatical section of the 
country. I decided to put an end to this matter and to the 
‘further massacre of lacs of Hindus for no fault of theirs. 
May God now pardon him for his egoistic nature-which 
proved to be too disastrous for the beloved sons of this 
Holy Land. 


141. I bear no ill-will or enmity towards any 
individual. Nor do I think that any person is inimical 
towards me personally. I do say that I had no respect for 
the present Government owing to their policy which was 
unfairly favourable to the Muslims. At the same time I 
could clearly see that the policy was entirely due to the 
presence of Gandhiji. In the absence of such pressure the 
way is now open for the establishment of a Secular State 
in the true sense of that word. I have to say with great 
regret that the hon’ble Prime Minister Pandit Nehruji 
quite forgets that his actions and deeds are at times 
` opposed to each other, when he talks about secular State 
in season and out of season; because it is significant to 
note that the hon’ble Pandit Nehruji has himself taken a 
leading part in acquiescing to the establishment of 
Pakistan, a theocratic State. But he should have realised 
that it will never bring prosperity to Indian Union with a 
State founded on fanatically blind religious faith and basis 
by its side. After having considered absolutely to myself, 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ir Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


No one has brought and could bring any pressure on me 
in this act of mine. 

142. The Honourable Court may take any view in 
regard to the impulse my mind received and the action I 
did thereunder and may pass against me such orders of 
sentence as may be proper. I have no desire to say anything 
about it. I do not desire any mercy to be shown to me. I do 
not also wish that anyone on my behalf should beg for 
mercy towards me. 


143. Several persons are arrayed along with me in 
this trial as conspirators. I have already said that in the 
act I did, I had no companions and I alone am solely - 
responsible for my act. Had they not been arraigned with 
me I would not have even given any defence for me as 
would be clear from the fact that I desired and enjoined 
upon my counsel not to cross-examine any of the witnesses 
connected with the incident of the 30th of J anuary, 1948. 


144. Ihave already made it clear that personally I 
had never accepted the idea of peaceful demonstration even 
on 20th January, 1948 even for effective propaganda. 
However, I agreed to join this peaceful demonstration in 
the prayer-meeting of Gandhiji, though with great 
reluctance. But as luck would have it, I could not take 
part in it. And when I found that even such demonstration 
could not be effectively staged for one reason or the other, 
I became rather disappointed and desperate. Efforts of 
Mr. Apte and others to secure volunteer made at Bombay, 
Poona and Gwalior bore no fruit. I could not then see any 

other way exeept to take the extreme course. 


145. With these thoughts in mind, while moving 
through the refugee Camp in Delhi, I met a photographer 
with a camera on his back. He asked me to get myself 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Climax of Anti-national Appeasement “F125 


photographed. He seemed to be a refugee. I agreed and 
got myself photographed by him. On returning to the Delhi 
Railway Station, I wrote two letters to Apte giving a faint 
idea of my mental state enclosing therewith my 
photographs as I felt it my duty to inform Mr. Nanarao 
Apte as he was my close associate in my business of the 
press; one of such letter was addressed to him personally 
at his home address at Poona and another was sent to the 
Hindu Rashtra Office. 


146. I wish to further state that all the statements 
made by me herein are entirely true and correct and each 
of them is made by reference to authoritative reference 
books. I have made use of the several issues of the Indian 
Information, an official organ of the Government of India 
for the information of the public, Indian Year Book, History 
of the Congress, Gandhiji’s Autobiography, Congress 
Bulletins issued from time to time and the files of Harijan 
and Young India, and Gandhiji’s post prayer speeches. I 
have made this rather long statement not because I want 
the people to eulogise my act. My only object in doing so is 
to leave no room for any misunderstanding about me, and 
there should be no vagueness in their mind about my 
views. 


147. May the country properly known as Hindustan 
be again united and be one and may the people be taught 
to discard the defeatist mentality leading them to submit 
to the aggressors. This is my last wish and prayer to the 
Almighty. 

148. I have now finished, but before I sit down must 
sincerely and respectfully express my gratitude to Your 
Honour for the patient hearing given, courtesy shown and, 
facilities given to me. Similarly I express my gratitude to’ 
my legal advisers and counsel for their legal help in this 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


me Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


great trial. I have no ill-will towards the Police Officers 
connected with this case. I sincerely thank them for the 
kindness and the treatment given by them to me. 
Similarly, I also thank the Jail authorities for the good 
treatment given by them. 


149. It is a fact that in the presence of a crowd 
numbering 300 to 400 people I did fire shots at Gandhiji 
in open daylight. I did not make any attempt to run away. 
In fact, I never entertained any-idea of running away. I 
did not try to shoot myself it was never my intention to do 
80, for, it was my ardent desire to give vent to my thoughts 
in an open Court. 


150. My confidence about the moral side of my action 
has not been shaken ven by the criticism levelled against 
it on all sides. I have no doubt honest writers of history 


will weigh my act and find the true value thereof on some 
day in future. 


' AKHANDA BHARAT AMAR RAHE 


VANDE MATARAM 
Sd/-Atma Charan 
- 8th November 1948 
(Special Judge) (Nathuram V. Godse) 


Delhi, 8.11.1948 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Arguments Before the Special Judge 
Judgment and Appeals to the High Court 


The statements of the accused, which were recorded 
from the 8th of November 1948 to 22nd of November 1948, 
ran into 260 pages. The defence had also put up 119 
documents. 


Out of the other accused, Madan Lal Pahwa had 
confessed that he had ignited the gun-cotton slab at the 
prayer meeting compound on the 20th January 1948 when 
Gandhiji’s post prayer lecture was going on. His action 
was only to record his protest against the pro-Muslim policy 
of Gandhiji which was against the national interests, and 
that there was neither any conspiracy nor was he a 
member of it. 


Digamber Badge having turned an approver, his 
statement was bound to favour the prosecution story. 


Nathuram Godse had unequivocally stated that it was 
he who deliberately fired the pistol with intent to kill and 
gave his elaborate reasons for doing so. He had denied the 
charge of conspiracy. All the other accused had denied the 
charge of conspiracy, or their alleged participation in it. 

The arguments of the Prosecution and the Defence 
commenced on 1.12.1948 and continued day to day. 
Nathuram V. Godse argued his own case, while Shri P.R. 
Das of Patna argued the case on behalf of Veer Savarkar. 
Two happenings in the Court-room cannot be omitted from 
mentioning. 

At the trial, Nathuram had said that two bullets had 
Passed from the pistol, while the medical report had found 
three. Shri C.K. Daphtary submitted that this argument 


of ‘two bullets’ was being put forward by the accused 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


er Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


(Nathuram) in order to make ground for ‘benefit of doubt. 
Nathuram promptly stood up and replied; 
The pistol was automatic. The trigger was pressed 
once. Whether two bullets passed or three, is 
immaterial, for even one was sufficient, and that 
one was fired by me. If on this discrepancy, any 
‘benefit of doubt’ accrues, the same may be granted 
to the prosecution. 


The other one was when Shri C.K. Daphtary in midst 
of his argument referred to the incident of the assassination 
as an ‘immoral’ act. Nathuram stood up and took a strong 
exception to it. 


At least as far as this case is concerned the 
Prosecution has no right to discuss the morality of 
the act, nor does the Court, I humbly submit, have 
any jurisdiction to decide that issue. The concepts 
of morality would be seen to be changing from 
society to society, from country to country and from 
century to century. In a particular society it would 
be considered immoral for women not, to use the 
veil (parda), while in others it may be perfectly 
moral. In some countries drinking liquors would 
not be considered immoral at all. In a certain 
century teaching Vedic lore to the non-Brahmins 
might have been looked upon as highly immoral, 
but today it is not. Such is the way concepts of 
morality go on changing. Nobody, therefore, will 
_ be able to determine any standard norm for judging 


morality or immorality for all times, irrespective 
_ of country or climate. 


If the Prosecution wants to maintain that killing 

_is absolutely, wholly and without any exception, 
‘immoral’, then it will have to be admitted that the 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Arguments Before the Special Judge... Œ 129 


present rulers themselves are behaving most 
immorally, because occasionally they have to resort 
to firing bullets on people. 

The Prosecution has neither the legal nor the moral 
right to bring forth this question. If the attorneys 
on the Government side are paid a little more than 
what they actually receive now they would 
unhesitatingly work as defence counsels. Can it, 
therefore, be said only on that count that they have 
abandoned morality or the moral side? 


The Court only has jurisdiction to decide the 
legality or otherwise of my action but in so far as 
morality is concerned, it is, a matter of my 
conviction that what I did was wholly moral and 
upon those convictions, this Court has no 
jurisdiction. 

Arguments were concluded on 30.12.1948. We had 
been given the impression that the judgment would 
be delivered after a month. 


The 10th of February 1949 dawned. We reached 
the Court. As the Judge Shri Atmacharan of the 
Special Court, Red Fort, went on pronouncing the 
sentences on the accused one after another, the 
suspense in their minds came to an end, and they 
could compose themselves ably. 


Nathuram and Nana Apte were sentenced ‘to be 
hanged by the neck till they are dead’ while Vishnu 
Karkare, Madan Lal Pahava, myself (Gopal Godse), 
Shankar Kistaiyya, and Dr. Parchure were sentenced to 
‘transportation for life’. Digambar Badge was tendered a 
pardon as he had turned an approver, while Veer Savarkar 
was honourably acquitted. There was an uneasy.calm after 
the pronouncement of the judgment, and then we all 
convicts shouted with one voice: 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


4130 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


~ gwatantrya Lakshmi Id Jai, Victory to Hindu Nation. 

Long live undivided India! Vande Mataram. ‘ 

The day of our sentence seemed to have passed away 
quickly, because of its newness and because of the quick 
succession of events that took place that day. When we 
got up the next morning we realised that we had passed 
into an altogether new world. ‘Our sleep was constantly 
disturbed because of the fetters. Howsoever despicable our 
condition might have been, we derived happiness from the 
thought that at least there was no one of our acquaintance 
to see us in that state. 


A period of fifteen days was allowed to prefer appeals 
against the verdict of the Special Court. Our lawyers were 
busy with the filing of our appeals. So they paid us a visit 
within two or three days, but no one from amongst us had 
any trace of sorrow or misery on our faces. Nathuram did 
not appeal against the charge proved under Section 302 
of the Penal Code and the sentence passed under it. His 
appeal was against the other charges taken to be 
established. We were removed to Ambala Central Jail in 
a Police van via Panipat after two months. 


Nathuram and Nana were taken to the condemned 

cells. The remaining five of us were sent to a yard. We 

` could go to the death—cells and see Nathuram and Nana 

Apte quite often. The sympathetic attitude of the—officers 

in the Ambala prison was our greatest satisfaction. It was 
perhaps prompted by two causes. 

These authorities observed us all very closely for some 
days. They found no trace of criminal tendencies in any © 
us. Secondly, they knew in their heart of hearts the reas" 
why Gandhiji was assassinated. 


We received the books of the printed records of the 
Mahatma Gandhi Murder Case on the 14th April 194 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Arguments Before the Special Judge... “F131 


and the day for hearing appeals was just fifteen days 
thereafter. Nathuram forthwith started studying these 
books and jotting down notes. 


The question whether Nathuram Godse should be 
allowed to argue in person or be forced to accept a pleader 
provided by the Government as ‘his pleader’, also attracted 
a judicial adjudication and this one was given on 24.3. 1949 
and is reported as Nathuram V. Godse vs The Crown. (AIR 
1949 East Punjab 321). The Court accepted his request 
and allowed Nathuram Godse to appear in person and 
argue his case. He was taken to Simla. 


Nathuram’s 40th birthday was on 19th of May 1949 
while he was at Simla. Our younger brother Dattatraya, 
who was released from detention from the Yeravada 
Central Prison (Pune, Maharashtra) a few months earlier, 
had gone to Simla to attend the Court for hearing the 
proceedings. 


In the evening of the 19th May, he was preparing to 
go to see Nathuram to greet him on the occasion of his 
birthday, when a girl came to see him. Dattatraya had 
casually seen her in the Court. 


The girl requested Dattatraya to take her to Nathuram 
as she wanted to see him. ‘But’, Dattatraya told her ‘only 
relatives are permitted’. She relied: ‘I shall manage that. 
Simply take me to the cell where he is lodged.’ 


She then disclosed her identity. She was the daughter 
of a sitting High Court judge but not on the Bench which 
was hearing the appeals. She had a small basket of fruit 
and some flowers. The authorities noted the name of 
Dattatraya as the only visitor and allowed the girl to 
accompany him. 

The girl paid her respects to Nathuram, and offered 
the flowers and fruit to him. In a few words she expressed 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BUP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


1927 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


BPU oo 
her appreciation. From the bottom of the basket she took 
out a sweater. She wanted it to pass on to Nathuram. The 
officer on duty checked it and allowed. 


Wear this sweater one day while arguing the case. J 
shall feel happy.’ She said. Nathuram thanked her and 
agreed to wear it. 


The late Maulana Azad has observed in his book, ‘India 
Wins Freedom’ on page 225, ‘Some women from 
respectable families sent him (Nathuram) a sweater they 
had knitted for him’, whereby he wanted to show how even 
the elite classes also considered Nathuram a hero. It was 
a fact. It was by way of hero-worship. 


The Full Bench of the East Punjab High Court’ 
comprising of Justices Amarnath Bhandari, Achhru Ram 
and Gopaldas Khosla, started the final hearing of our 
appeals on the 23rd of May 1949. The hearing continued 
day to day for a fortnight. 


About Nathuram’s stay at Simla a special mention has 
to be made of the curiosity that it had aroused amongst 
the people because he himself was to conduct his own case 
and that too with the sword of Death hanging constantly 
over his head. It was public knowledge that he had not 
appealed against the death sentence passed on him by 
the Special Court in the Red Fort. People wondered how 
Nathuram could ever attain that equanimity of mind to 
argue his case in a coherent manner. The audience mainly 
consisted of the high-brow people who formed a major 
section of the then population of Simla. 


Justice Shri Khosla [who was on the Bench of the East 
Punjab High Court], in his recent book, ‘The Murder of 
the Mahatma’, had this to say : 


The highlight of the appeal before us was the 


discourse delivered by Nathuram Godse in his 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Arguments Before the Special Judge... 133 


defence. He spoke for several hours discussing, in 
the first instance, the facts of the case and then 
the motive which had prompted him to take 
Mahatma Gandhi’s life. 

The audience was visibly and audibly moved. There 
was a deep silence when he ceased speaking. Many 
women were in tears and men were coughing and 
searching for their handkerchiefs. This silence was 
accentuated and made deeper by the sound of an _ 
occasional subdued sniff or a muffled cough. 


I have however no doubt that had the audience of 

that day been constituted into a jury and entrusted 

with the task of deciding Godse’s appeal, they would 
have, brought in a verdict of ‘not guilty’ by an 
overwhelming majority. 

The High Court judgment was delivered on the 22nd . 
of June 1949. Dr. Parchure and Shankar Kistaiyya were 
acquitted. The conviction of all others including the death 
sentences on Nathuram Godse and Nana Apte were 
maintained. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment, 
and till Execution of the Death Sentence. 


_ After the hearing of the appeals was over, Nathuram 
was brought back to Ambala Central jail and lodged in 
the condemned cell yard in the middle of June 1949. 
Nana Apte was already there. They both remained there 
till the end. 


While at Simla in the temporary custody made for 
Nathuram, he received a letter which was duly censored 
by the authorities and passed on to him. It was from 
Shri Ramdas Gandhi one of the sons of Gandhiji. The 
lettter reads: 

Khalasi Line, Nagpur, C.P. 
Dated 17th May, 1949. 


Dear Nathuram Godse, 


The writer of this letter is the son of one you 
seem to take great pride in having assassinated. 


I am sure, you will one day realise that you 
have only put an end to my. father’s perishable body 
and nothing more. Because not only in my case but 
in the case of millions all over the world, the spirit 
of my father still rules their hearts. This stands 
proved by the homage that has been paid to my 
father by nations and people all over the world. 


You know that today everyone all over the world 
is thirsting and pining for peace. But you must have 
stood aghast to find that amongst the biggest war- 
lords of the present age to say and believe that it is 


not the atomic energy that is going to bring peace 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... 135 


to the world, but it is the mutual understanding 
and respect for one by the other—better understood 
by the millions of this country by the simple and 
significant words ‘Satya and Ahimsa’. 

I hope that the above facts will help in the 
dissolution of the mist of misunderstanding your 
mind and vision seem to be shrouded with, once 
you rid your mind of .this misunderstanding. I have — 
no doubt, you will repent and realise that what you 
have done is a deed never to be repeated but 
shunned for all the times, be it in the interest of 
one’s own religion or political creed or anything else. 
You are reported to have stated very recently that 
you are a man of ‘reason and logic.’ I, therefore, — 
urge upon you to ponder over my above heart- 
pourings and if you do so, you will find that you 
have not the least served the cause so very dear to 
you by having done what you have done. 

Yours truly, _ 
Sd/- R. Gandhi — 
l P.S. I may inform you that on 1.5.1949, I have 
` addressed a letter to the Governor General of India, 
giving him my reason why you should not be made 
. to suffer the penalty awarded by the Special 
Tribunal to look into the charges framed against 
_you by the authorities concerned. 
Sd/- R. Gandhi 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


136 F Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
Nathuram replied: 
‘OM? 
Simla 
3rd June, 1949, 
Dear Brother Shri Ramdas Gandhi, 


Received your most kind letter of the 17th May, 
1949, yesterday. As ahuman being I have no words 
to express my feelings for the wounds that you and 
your relatives must have received by the tragic end 
of your revered father, fey my hands. But at the 
same time I state that there is the other side to 

. look at. I am not in a position to write all my 
thoughts on paper nor am I ina position to see you 
personally. But certainly you are in a position to 
see me in jail before my execution. 


You say that you have heard that ‘I am a man 
of reason and logic’. True. But you will be surprised 
to note that I am aman of very powerful sentiments 
also, and ‘Devotion’ to my mother-land is the 
topmost of the same. 


You say that once my mind is free from 
misunderstandings then I shall no doubt repent 
and realise my blunder, 


Brother, I say Iam an open-minded man always 
subject to correction. But what is the way to remove 
my misunderstanding, if any, to make me repent? 


Certainly not the gallows, nor ‘a big show of 
mercy, and to commute my punishment. The only 
way 1s to see me and to make me realise. Until 


now I have come across nothing which will make 
me repent. 5 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... “¥ 137 
ees Ss a M 


I have received Several letters from some 
prominent Christian Missions and according to 
their faith and teaching of the ‘Holy Bible’, they 
have tried to give me some message. Their stand 
is quite intelligible. But yours is the first letter that 
I have received which resembles to some extent to 
the well known or more known teachings of your 
revered father. Really this is surprising. I have 
received many letters full of abuses. I do not 
consider that they were written by any disciple of 
your father. 


Any way, I must request you to see me and if 
possible with some prominent disciples of your 
father, particularly who are not interested in any 
power politics, and to bring to my notice my most 
fatal mistake. 

Otherwise, I shall always feel that this show of 
mercy is nothing but an eyewash. 

If you actually see me and have a talk with me 
either sentimentally or on reason, who knows you 
will be able to change me and make me repent or I 
may change you and make you realise my stand? 
The condition of the talk must be that we must 
stick to the truth alone. 

Again I express my utmost regrets as a human 
being for your sufferings due to the death of your 
father by my hands. 


Yours sincerely, 

Sd/- Nathuram V. Godse. 

N.B. If you prefer, then please send a copy of 
this to H.E. the Governor General of the Dominion 


of India. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


BF Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
Shri Ram Das Gandhi’s another letter to Godse: 


Khalasi Lines, Nagpur 
Dated 13th June, 1949 


Dear Shri Nathuram Godse, 
Received your letter dated 3rd June, 1949. 


I feel happy to find that you are always willing 
(lit. free) to accept views. Similarly, the wish 
expressed by you for talking freely with me and 
with the close associates of my father on the 
questions whether the ways and means adopted 
by you have proved to be useful or are likely to 
prove useful sometime in future in preserving the 
integrity of our mother land, or preserving the 
integrity of our centuries—old Hindu religion which 
is, like any other current religion, aloof from any 
kind of differences is encouraging. 

Similarly, without giving any promise of holding 
talks with you on behalf of the Government of India 
as well as on behalf of myself or those who will 
accompany me, I am making a request to Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru to grant permission today to 
Shri Vinoba Bhave, Shri Kishorilal Mashruwala 
and me for holding talks with you on the above- 


mentioned subject, because it is your sincere desire 
that it should be so. 


If destiny has ordained that the projected talk 
should take place, the talk will take place only after 
25th June 1949 because you should kindly note 
that it will not be Possible for me to go to Delhi 
from Nagpur and from there to proceed to the place 
where you have been kept before 25th June. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... = 139 


I think you should not have stipulated the 
condition, ‘we should speak in consonant with 
truth’, because I think that condition was not only 
unnecessary in my case but also unnecessary in 
the case of any close associates of my father. 


In the meantime, I want to suggest to you that 
you should spend all available time at your disposal 
in self introspection and that too by placing full 
faith in Almighty. You should pray that ‘He alone 
will bestow his favourable benediction on you’, 
because I feel that such favour alone will help in 
bringing your mistake to your notice. And it will 
dawn upon you that Gandhiji ultimately knew it 
well, how to protect our motherland and 
particularly Hindu religion from insult or injury. 
If you do this, I am confident that at the end of the 
projected meeting between you and me you will be 
able to recite with us the following verse in the 18th 
Chapter of Bhagavat Gita, which is a perfect poem 
in beauty and meaning: 


YT Ja 
Wet We: qiien aaar 
Radsin ates: RRA aed wall 
O, Achyuta, because of your favour my ignorance 
has disappeared. I have regained normalcy. I am 
herewith all doubts resolved. I will do what you say. 


Yours sincerely 
Sd/- R.M. Gandhi 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


140 Why I Assassinated Gandhi 
Reply sent by NathuramGodse: 


Central Prison, 
Ambala, 
24th June, 1949. 


Dear Shri Ramdas Gandhi, 


Received your letter dated the 13th instant on 
28rd June and noted down the contents. 


I am happy that you responded to my request. 
You may come at any time convenient to you. You 
can meet me a day before the execution also. I am 
not impatient about this meeting. I am feeling a 
kind of satisfaction also by your intention to meet 
me. If you do not meet me at all owing to some 
other difficulties, I will not feel anything about it 
because in your heart you showed readiness to meet 
me. The sincerity of your purpose is reflected in 
this. It is sufficient for me. 


However, I request you that you should try to 
bring about this meeting. 


I agree with your statement that I should not 
have stipulated that ‘truth alone should be spoken’. 
Believe me that while writing that it was not my 
purpose to hurt you. There were mainly two reasons 
in my mind behind that writing. I have met many 
so called votaries of the creed of Truth’. However 
in actual life they bother the least about that creed. 


I have seen some people distorting truth on vow in 
the witness box. 


And another reason is that I shall perhaps have 


to speak some bitter truth in our conversation. At 


least according to my belief, it will be truth and it 
will be bitter. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... 141 


Whatever it may be. I have got this much . 
assurance from your letter that I should not be ' 
afraid of speaking fearlessly. 

I thank you for having reminded me of the verse 
‘My ignorance has disappeared’. 

I have regained normalcy from the Bhagwat 
Gita. In my opinion not only these verses in the 
Gita but the whole of the Gita is an invaluable poem 
replete with meaning and beauty. 

After Arjun had said ‘I will do as you say’ he 
had directly translated into practice the words of 
Lord Krishna, ‘Remember me and fight’. 

Shri Vinoba Bhave is Maharashtrian by birth. 
You make an enquiry, if possible, into my general 
character and behaviour prior to the imprisonment, 
through him (V. Bhave) or through anybody else. 
It will be perhaps useful to you to know the 
background of the individual who committed the 
cruel unlawful act. 


Nothing more at present. 
Yours sincerely 
Sd/- N.V. Godse 
24th June 1949 


Apart from the said correspondence which amply 
displays Nathuram’s mental equilibrium, deep conviction 
and yet open mindedness to receive thoughts. His words 
were: 


Let the disciples of Gandhi satisfy me that I have 
acted wrong; I shall declare my repentance without 
asking for any reward for it and go to the gallows. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


i Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


On the other hand, if I satisfy them of the 
justifiability of my act they should be honest enough 
to admit so openly. 
Escape from the gallows is no allurement to me. 
Soin that case too I shall gladly climb the platform 
of the rope. f 
That a man of Nathuram’s calibre should have been 
the cause of the death of an important politician like 
Gandhiji, who, as every body knows, had such an 
unparalleled sway over the Indian political life for the 
- period of nearly thirty five years prior to his assassination, 
made it imperative for the people to re-examine his 
antecedents. 


That Nathuram remained steadfast till the end need 
not, I think, be proved by adducing any more evidence 
than what has been so far cited. Since the time of 
assassination of Gandhiji till Nathuram’s death on the 
gallows a great span of twenty-one months and a half or 
six hundred and fifty-five days had elapsed. Throughout 
all these days Nathuram’s daily routine was most 
systematically observed. Even his daily religious rituals. 
He had not become averse to eating or drinking, nor did 
he suffer from sleeplessness. 


On the 11th of November 1949 parents of Nathuram 
Godse sent him a telegram blessing him, to which 


Nathuram wrote a consolatory letter. A translated 
Summary whereof is as follows: 


Ambala, 12.11.1949 
‘My most revered Mother and Father, 


l I have your photographs with me here which I 
. will worship before I deliver myself up and be 
united with Brahma. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... 143 


I have no doubt that you are bound to feel ; 
extreme, heart-rending grief at my loss, because of 
our worldly relation in this life. But I am not writing 
this letter to give vent to my sorrow or to 
philosophize on it. 

You are the students of the Geeta and have also 
learnt the Puranas. Lord Krishna had recited this 
Geeta to enlighten Arjun and the very same Lord 
Krishna had with his Sudarshan wheel chopped 
off the head of an Aryan King Shishupal, not on a 
battle-field but on a sacrificial ground, the Rajsooya 
Yadnyabhoomi! Who will say that Lord Krishna 
committed sin in doing so? Giving gifts or donations 
to the wicked is not considered a virtuous act; it is 
irreligious. For the sake of one single Seeta being 
forcibly carried away by Ravana a mighty war had 
to be fought and for the sake of one Draupadi’s 
insult an epic war in Mahabharata had to be waged. 
Here in cur very country in our very presence 
hundreds and thousands of Hindu women were 
being molested, raped and carried away forcibly to 
be converted to Islam and the perpetrators of these 
atrocious deeds were being helped in all possible 
ways. In such circumstances I could not sit silent 

and watch helplessly all this through fear of losing 
my life or of incurring public censure and wrath. I 
am sure the blessings of thousands of young women 
are behind my back to support me. . 

I have laid down my life at the feet of my beloved 
Motherland. 

My mind is pure and my feelings are absolutely 
righteous. To beg for my life as alms by pleading 
for mercy is something I never liked. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ar Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


Death did not come to me to demand my life; I 
myself have gone to Him to offer it. 


There are millions of people who will shed their 
tears at this sacrifice of our lives. They are going 
to share your sorrow. 


Akhand Bharat Amar Rahe! 

Vande Mataram. 
Nathuram continued to read and write regularly till 
the end. Just on the previous day of the execution he had 
completed a long letter written to Shri G.T. Madkholkar 
besides some others and had also signed in the autograph- 


books of some of the visitors who had obtained permission 
from the authorities. 


The actual process of execution is not the really 
horrifying thing in a sentence of death; death comes to 
the condemned convict without any agonies worth 
speaking of. The greatest horror lies for the convict in 
passing moment after dreadful moment in absolute 
loneliness waiting all the time for the executioner’s rope. 


As a matter of fact the sentence of death is not the 
sentence of imprisonment but only in a technical sense. 
Because of the inevitability of the law the condemned 
convict has necessarily to languish in imprisonment, which 


is much harder to bear than any other kind of 
imprisonment. 


Nathuram and Nana Apte were not exempted from 
any rules enforced on condemned convicts. 


< Even under such depressing and oppressive conditions 
in the prison the condemned person goes on living, willy- 
nilly. The person to be executed entertains some hope that 
perhaps his punishment of death on the gallows may be 
changed to some other lesser type of punishment or may 


be quashed altogether and he may be set free, who knows? 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... 145 


ment o o Fn A 
So he, beguiled by_such a fond hope puts up with all the 
harassment and vexation of the prison. 

Nathuram, however, had never entertained any such 
hope, because he had not appealed against the sentence 
of death passed on him and the High Court had no reason 
to reconsider his conviction on that count. Nana Apte was 
nonetheless courageous nor less patient. 


While we, the accused, were kept in the special prison 
in the Red Fort as undertrial prisoners, Nathuram, Nana 
Apte and Savarkar used to have discussions on the 
Patanjali’s Yogasutras. 

In their contemporary friends’ circle Nana is known 
as one given to luxurious living while Nathuram is 
considered to be an ascetic—of course in a little bit 
exaggerated way of speech. 

Nana might have been given to luxurious living, we 
may assume for a while, but in his cell for the condemned, 
he was quite self composed and steadfast. 

Nathuram and Apte continued to be lodged in the 
condemned cells of the Ambala Central Jail. Roughly a 
week before the execution Central Government Home 
Ministry declared the date of execution of Nathuram and 
Apte as 15th of November 1949. Relatives were 
telegraphically informed to see the condemned convicts 
for the last time on 14 November 1949. The relatives 
numbering about 30 to 35 had gathered to have the last 
‘Darshan’ of both Nathuram and Apte. 

The meeting was gloomy in the beginning on part of 
the visitors, but was very pleasant in the end. Enquired 

one of the relatives: 

Well Nathuram it is the custom to immerse the 

ashes (remains) in Ganga at Haridwar, or Triveni 

Sangam (meeting of three rivers) at Prayagraj or 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


oo Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


Gadavari at Nasik. How come, that you chose 
‘Sindhv’ river for the immersion of your remains? 


The reply was prompt: 
That is the only river which has remained unpolluted. 


There was a huge laughter. All those present had 
known that Gandhiji’s remains could not be sunk in the 
‘Sindhu’. Nathuram had even made a reference of it at 
para 128 of his statement. The relatives had also known 
about the Will of Nathuram. His answer was thus bound 
to evoke laughter. The conversation was in Marathi. The 
jailor who was a refugee from Punjab, asked to know what 
the wit was. He was told of the answer in Hindi and he too 
could not help laughing. E 


The meeting of Nana Apte and his wife, Champutai, 
was extremely touching. ‘Look’, Nana said to her, ‘from 
tomorrow onwards you have to weep, weep and weep! 
These few moments have come to our lot to afford us a 
hearty talk in privacy. Why not spend them cheerfully?” 


The group returned very joyously seeing both of the 
condemned persons beyond the reach of fear, even at the 
threshold of the Death. They were to be hanged the next 
morning. : 

Karkare, Madan Lal and I, went to see Nathuram and 
Nana once again. We recited some chapters from the 


Bhagwat Geeta, particularly the II, the XI and the XVIII, 
which Nathuram liked most. 


The jailors on duty talked and talked and talked with 
them all the night, Saying that they would not have any 
opportunity thereafter. It was true. The Superintendent, 
the jailors and the staff also developed affection towards 


them because of the moral foundation behind the act and 
high morale of the condemned convicts. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Events After the High Court Judgment... “147 


We went to see Nathuram and Nana Apte again at 
dawn. None of us was sentimental or downcast with grief 
at that time. They were cheerful whereas we were well- 
composed. We certainly were not dejected. 

In the tender rays of the morning sun at 8 o'clock both 
Nathuram and Nana were ready to face the gallows with 
the map of the Undivided India, the saffron-colour flag 
and a copy of the Bhagwat Geeta in their hands. Apte was 
delighted to see the gentle sunlight and at once exclaimed 
with joy, ‘Pandit, how charming, how bewitching is this 
early morning Sunlight!’ 

‘Oh dear,’responded Nathuram equally enthusiastically, 

it’s almost always so very pleasant in Simla.’ 

‘Akhand Bharat Amar Rahe! (Long live the Undivided 
India!) and Vande Mataram (Bow I here to Thee, O 
Mother!) were the skyrending slogans on their lips when 
they both entered the execution enclosure. Once inside 
the enclosure, and with the ropes round their necks, they 
both sang at the top of their voices: 

Namaste Soda Vatsale Matribhume 

Twaya Hindubhume Sukham Vardhitoham — 

Mahanmangale Punyabhume Twadarthe 

Patatwesh Kayo Namaste, Namaste!’ 

Vande Mataram 

Translated into English it meant: 

Bow to Thee, O, Living Motherland, forever! 
Brought up by Thee am I in happiness, 

O, Land of the Hindus! 

O, most sacred and holy Land, for Thy sake 
May this body fall! Bow to Thee, Bow to Thee, 
for ever and ever! 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. nio eree Mataram 


148 F Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


No sooner had these words mingled with the 
atmosphere than the hangman pulled the rod of the planks 
from under their feet andthe two lives were blended for 
ever with the Five Elements! The timing of the hangman’, 
move. I would describe also as an act of nature,—for 80 
perfectly timed it was that the planks moved after the 
word ‘Vande’ leaving just enough time for Mataram’ tobe 
uttered before the rope took over. 


I have come to the conclusion that the revolutionists 

have a spiritual philosophy of their own, on the strength 

. of which, in my opinion they face the gallows and stare 
' without a wink into the very eyes of Death. 


‘The cremation was inside the jail premises. On the 
following day of the execution of Nathuram and Apte, when 
these visitors came back to the Ambala Railway Station 
for their return journey, the station was overcrowded with 
the local people for bidding adieu to them and the whole 
station yard resounded with the loud shouts of ...... ki jai, 
as a mark of sympathy. 


Nathuram made his ‘Will’, in which he had expressed 
his last wish which enjoined upon ‘the people’ to let his 
ashes fall into the Indus,—the Sindhu, and that too only 
when that river would come under the Indian National 
Flag as an indivisible, integral part of the Indian Nation: 
may it then be after a lapse of many years and after a8 
many generations! A copy of his Will appears in the 
appendix. 

That was the end of Nathuram V. Godse and Nani 


_Apte accused 1 & 2. The other accused served their jal 
terms; whereafter they were set free. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse 
and of The Other Accused 


1. Nathuram Vinayak Godse, (Accused No. 1) 
| was born on 19th of May 1910 at 
Baramati District, Poona. He hailed from 
| Chitpavan Brahmin community. 
Nathuram’s grandfather i e his father’s 
father, was an erudite Brahmin, named 
Vamanrao. Besides agriculture he carried 
on the profession of priesthood. His native village was 
Uksan. } l 

Vamanrao had three daughters and one son, who was 
named Vinayak, born in 1875. When Vinayak, in the final 
year of his school education, was seventeen year old, he 
was married to Godavari, aged about 10. Her name was 
changed to Lakshmi after marriage. 


When he passed his school-leaving examination, he was 
employed in the Postal Department, on a monthly salary 
of five rupees for the first three months and then fifteen 
rupees. Lakshmi gave birth to a son at Baramati. It was 
the 19th of May 1910. He was nicknamed ‘Nathu’. This 
nickname was later on routinised as Nathuram. 

Nathuram began his primary education at Baramati. 
His thread-ceremony was performed in the Ram Mandir. 
Nathuram had committed to memory a great deal from 
the ‘Selections from the Medieval and Nineteen Century 
Marathi Poetry, Navaneeta’: 

Nathuram took to reading at an early age. He began ~ 
reading the ‘Kesari’ not because he understood its contents, 
but simply for the love of reading. Naturally whatever was 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Foe Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


Saat : = 
published on the subject of the attainment of independence 
influenced him first indirectly and later directly. 


After he passed the fourth standard in the Primary 
School he was kept with his aunt in Pune for his English 
education. Nathuram’s mode of reasoning was thoroughly 
logical which got reflected when he had grown up. In his 
childhood he was more sentimental than rational. 


In every generation there are always some young 
enthusiasts who take keen interest in social work and 
Nathuram was one of them. 


While at Lonavla, a child fell into a well and his mother 
and other women around raised a hue and cry. At that 
time Nathuram and one of his friends were passing by the 
well. The well had steps. The child was not drowned. So 
Nathuram immediately jumped into the well, took up the 
child and climbed the steps up. 


The child saved was a Mahar by caste, said by some 
was an untouchable. Whatever might have been the 
reasons, which led him to join whole-heartedly the 
campaign against casteism, this must have been one of 
them./ i 


Nathuram was, however, consciously watchful of the 
active politics of the day. The result of this political 
consciousness in him was that his attention was diverted 
from his studies. As the Satyagraha movement was 
gathering momentum at that time under the leadership 
of Gandhiji, he asked his father if he could join it. The 
father told him that education must have precedence over 
everything else. Ë 


Nathuram, studyingin the Nootan Marathi Vidyalaya, 
appeared for his Matriculation Examination. In the 
meanwhile the father was transferred to Ratnagiri, during 
the year 1929-30. This transfer proved to be & 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused 151 


revolutionary event not only in the life of Vinayakrao but 
in that of Nathuram also. ; 
Veer Savarkar was living then at Ratnagiri. He was 
under government restriction and was forbidden to leave 
the precincts of Ratnagiri district and from writing, 
discussing Or lecturing on political issues. Savarkar was 
then known to the people only surreptitiously. His series 
of articles named Mazi Janamthep’ (My Transportation 
for Life) was by then published in book form. It was later 
banned and confiscated. Nathuram had come to know the 
greatness of Veer Savarkar. ee 


Off and on Nathuram could hear from the very lips of- 
Veer Savarkar his exploits in London. Once he brought, 
home a copy of Savarkar’s ‘War of Independence of 1857’, 
which he used to read it at night. Nathuram gladly 
undertook the work of copying the writing of Veer . 
Savarkar. He was happy that of all the persons he was 
the first to know about it. ve 

Savarkar often gave him guidance as to how to read 
and what to read. Nathuram had now begun to participate 
in public meetings on political issues. i 

The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (R.S.S.) started 
by its founder, Dr. Hedgewar, with the intention to 
organise the Hindus, was fast gaining popularity. 
Nathuram had come to know about this organization. 

The attitude of the Muslim community as a whole 

_ towards the struggle for attaining independence ia 
clearly seen to be, even at that time, somewhat indifferent 
and at times even blatantly hostile. 

A branch of the R.S.S. was opened at Sangli headed by 
Shri Kashinathpant Limaye. Nathuram began to take part 

Very soon he came 


in the Sangh activities most assiduously. 
tohead its academic department (a8 ‘Bandhik Karyawaha). 


/ 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
152 y 


UnU o ae 
~~ In 1937 the Cooper-Jamnadas Ministry set Veer 


Savarkar completely free. On his way to Bombay he was 
felicitated at Kolhapur, Miraj, Sangli, Pune and other 
places and at each of these places he delivered lectures. 

` Nathuram started going about with Veer Savarkar every 
where, and then he began to realise how gigantic the task 
of organising Hindus into a homogeneous whole was, and 
also how the work of the Sangh (R.S.S.) required to be 
supplemented by an uprising in the political field. His 
vision began to widen, and he felt that Sangli was too 
small a place for his activities. He settled in Pune. 


The Hindu Mahasabha decided in 1938 to launch an 
agitation for the removal of injustice done to the Hindus 
of the Hyderabad State so that they may get their 
legitimate rights. The name of that agitation was given 
‘unarmed resistance’. 

Nathuram led the first batch of the passive resistance. 
He and his companions were sentenced to one year’s 
imprisonment, which they underwent in the Hyderabad 
prison. 

Nathuram decided to start a newspaper for the Hindu 
Mahasabha. It was ‘Agrani’, some years later was renamed 
as ‘Hindu Rashtra’. 

Securities were repeatedly demanded from this 
newspaper. After the publication of the last issue on the 31st 
of January 1948, this newspaper went out of publication. 

The period of six to seven years prior to 1948 was a 
VES) busy period in Nathuram’s life, Taken up by the 
writing of articles for thé new 


0 for running the newspaper; 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by SEENON : = 


Spapers, lectures, tours and 


~ a 


-a D D 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused “B 153 


Nathuram was peaceful and generous by disposition. 
On the political platform however he gave full vent to his 
feelings which at times seemed to reach the extreme limits 
of endurance and yet were restrained with effort. 


Nathuram could play ably on the harmonium. He 
played equally well on the flute. 


Nathuram was not unfamiliar with the activities 
started by Gandhiji for mass awakening, nor was he 
unmindful of their importance. So it would be enlightening 
to see in what state of mind he took the decision to 
assassinate Gandhiji. 


Those who consider the episode of Gandhiji’s 
assassination as a casual act of a trigger-happy person 
are ignorant, because they are innocent victims of a 
propaganda. 

Gandhiji by the technic of his Satyagraha conveyed to 
the common masses the real significance of the words, ‘our 
country bondage’, ‘Swaraj’ etc. 


The growing generation at the height of Gandhiji’s 
political career was nourished with the enlivening doses 
of the songs of independence on their lips. 


Armed revolution was never the creed of Gandhiji. But 
the political Consciousness among the people who were so 
keen that they freely shouted ‘Sardar Bhagat Singh ki 
jai’ when they were out on mass awakening campaigns. 


It is true that many Congress leaders felt that the 
policy of Gandhiji on the communal problem had fired back 
and so he should retire from active politics and should not ' 
meddle with national decisions. 


Severe, of course, were the feelings of the refugees. 
Independence? Of what worth? Such was the miserable 
condition they found themselves that the very earth under 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


ei Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


their feet had literally slipped away without any 
earthquake having taken place. Waves after waves of 
blood-drenched refugees returned to India every day. 


Every displaced person was himself or herself a 
grievous wound and actually had a tongue. No newspaper 
could have succeeded in fanning discontent and indignation 
and surcharge the whole atmosphere with intense feeling 
even if it meant to, so poignantly and on such a vast, scale 
as did every sign and word form the innumerable tongueg 
of the refugees. 


Countless people pronounced bitter curses, not only in 
their private homes, but in public places, that it was because 
of Gandhiji that they had lost their homes and hearths and 
so Gandhiji must not live. However the idea of killing 
Gandhiji was itself far more grievous and repugnant. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused “H 155 


Nathuram told us of the incident: 


I had reached the gates of the Birla Bhavan at 
about ten minutes to five in the evening. The guards ` 
at the gates were closely watching the people going 
in for the prayer-meeting. I was to expect the 
greatest danger from these guards. So taking 
utmost precaution to let it appear that I belonged 
to a group of four or five people going in I managed 
to enter the Birla Bhavan. Once again I felt that 
the Police-men moving about had, as it were, 
focussed their eyes on me, because the prayer- 
ground was still almost empty. So I hastened as 
quickly as possible to the spot where people were 
standing in greater number and stationed myself 
there. 


At about five minutes past five I saw Gandhiji 
and his entourage leaving the room and 
approaching the prayer-ground. I went and stood 
amongst a group of people near the spot where he 
would ascent the steps to the prayer-ground. 


Gandhiji ascended the steps and proceeded five 
or six steps forward, his hands resting on the 
shoulders of two girls. 


I opened the safety-catch of the pistol inside 
the pocket itself. I had already observed that in 
spite of the people round about Gandhiji I could 
get the scope I wanted. 


I needed about three seconds more to go ahead 
two steps, get in front of Gandhiji, to draw the 
weapon out of my pocket, and to make obeisance 
to Gandhiji for whatever useful service he had 
rendered to the country and the sacrifice he had 


made in his life-time thereof, __ È 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu“ Digitized by eGangotri 


Why | Assassinated Gandhi, 
156 y 


Ofthe two girls accompanying Gandhiji one was 
rather too close to him and I feared that she might 
be hurt in the attempt. So deciding what to do to 
avoid that eventuality I moved forward and uttering 
the words ‘Namaste’ (Bow to you) I bowed to 
Gandhiji with the hands holding the weapon. 
Moving one step more ahead I pushed that girl aside. 


In the next split second the shots were fired. 
Weak as he already was, Gandhiji collapsed almost 
instantly dead on the ground, with the faintest ‘Ah’! 
which arose from deep down his lungs. 


Gandhiji’s indestructible incombustible and 
under-changeable soul which was also incapable 
of being dried, was fast leaving the body and 
vanishing into the elements and I was entering my 
live Samadhi (living death). 

I had a weapon in my hand. I had fired the 
bullets. Nobody could confidently say that I would 
not fire some more bullets. If some armed policeman 
had fired a bullet into me at that moment, it would 
have been undoubtedly justifiable. 


No sooner had the bullets been fired than I 
raised my hand holding the pistol and shouted 
‘Police, Police’. Half a minute elapsed, yet no one 
dared approach nearer. Every moment the strain 
on my mind was increasing, and I became 
absolutely restless. I think I was getting excited. 


At that time I was not at all conscious whether 
any body was or was not going to hammer me, nor 
had I in my mind the slightest thought of warding 
off the blows if somebody offered to belabour me. 


1. The words Hey Ram, Hey Ram and Hey Ram’ were a fiction of 
the imagination of the then Government and attributed to him 
in order to gain the Hindu sentiment, 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused 157 


Today I can interpret my mental condition as 
existed at that moment. I was prepared to face any 
consequences of the act of assassinating Gandhiji. 
Only I did not want to have three charges to be 
levelled against me by anybody. First, I did not want 
anyone even to hint that I tried to run away. Half a 
minute later I again shouted ‘Police, Police’ I could 
very well see standing right before me the policemen 
in uniform, and they dared not step forward to arrest 
me. Were I to throw away my pistol (to dispel their 
fear), that act of mine would have been taken to 
mean that I was preparing a loophole for my defence. 
Naturally, I did not want such an allegation made 
against me. And I was at a loss to know how to 
convince the Police, that I wanted to surrender 
myself, weapon in hand, to them. 

I did not want to hurt any one else even through 
mistake. That is why I continued to wait for the 
police to come forward, with my hand holding the 
pistol raised high up. If I had kept my hand down 
playing with pistol—though quite inadvertently— 
there would certainly have been some witnesses to 
state that I had pointed the pistol at them.’ 


I started glancing all around and probably met 
the gaze of Amarnath or that of the so-called soldier. 
He seemed to be convinced of the sincerity in my 
eyes and came near to me and held my raised wrist 
up. He must have felt the total absence of resistance 
in it. The strain on my mind quickly vanished, and 
I heaved a sigh of relief. Followed yet another man,, 
who got hold of my weapon which I let go without 
any resistance. 

And thereafter people drew close to me and 
encircled me. Some struck me with their hands. 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


1587 Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


The police were stupid enough to allow the pistol 
to change hands to satisfy the curious. Some one 
from the crowd levelled itat me, saying ‘With this 
very pistol I will kill you’. Calmly but loudly enough 
to make my words audible to him even in that 
tumultuous noise, I replied, ‘With pleasure. Go 
ahead’ But you don’t seem to have any knowledge 
of the way to handle a pistol. Mind, the safety-catch 

is on. Even if by chance it were to receive the 
slightest jerk you would likely kill somebody else. 
Remember, there are some bullets in it.’ Then I 
requested the nearest police officer to take the pistol 
in his custody, reminding him that the safety-catch 
was on and there was every likelihood that the man 
would kill somebody else instead of me. The officer 
immediately took possession of that pistol, closed 
the safety-catch and deposited it in his pocket. 


Nathuram had already decided at the very outset of 
the trial not to allow his advocate to cross-examine the 
witnesses put up to depose in respect of the events of the 
30th of January, to the extent, of course, to which they 
reférred to that event. 


Many eye-witnesses were examined. Nathuram 
admired their enthusiasm but pitied their ‘honesty’. 
Everyone wanted the credit of apprehending him. Their 


deposition was inconsistent and contradictory to one 
another’s, 


Nathuram had with him an automatic pistol with 
seven bullets. He had pulled the trigger only once. Two or 
three bullets had passed. 

Lt. Col. B.L. Tane 
Hospital, New Delhi, g 
the description of the fi 


ja, Addl. Civil Surgeon, Irwin 
ave in the course of his evidence 
ve wounds on Gandhiji’s body, and 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


s 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused “¥ 159 


said that in his opinion the death was caused by the bullets 
from the pistol. He too was not cross-examined. . 

This theoretical stand of Nathuram was seen by the | 
East Punjab High Court of the appellants, say their 
Lordships in their judgment: 

Nathuram V. Godse has not challenged his 
conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code for the offence of the murder of Mahatma 
Gandhi on 30th January, 1948, nor has he appealed 
from the sentence of death passed on him in respect 
of that offence. He has confined his appeal and also 
his arguments at the Bar - he personally argued 
his appeal, I must say with conspicuous ability 
evidencing a mastery of facts which would have 
done credit to any counsel, only to the other charges 
which have been proved against him. 


On an argument relating to the incidence of 20th 
January, Justice Achhru Ram said: 


We have seen quite enough of Nathuram during 
the period of more than fivé4weeks while we were 
hearing these appeals and particularly during the 
eight or nine days while he was arguing his own case 
and I cannot imagine that a man of his calibre could 
have even entertained the idea (of remaining behind). 


The judges had evidently realised that this murder 
had been an unfortunate outcome of the situation then 


‘prevailing in the country. The High Court in the city of 


Lahore had been turned into a refuge for the Hindus in 
that city and in that State had been removed perforce and 
they had to flee for safety to the rest of the Indian territory. 
If sentencing Nathuram to death was doing justice to the 
people, then equally so ek the just evaluation of his 
feelings. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh pene BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


460 °° Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


— Coffee was his favourite drink. He never took tea since 
his adolescence. While in the condemned cell he once told 
the Jailor jocularly, ‘I don’t mind the gallows; but I must 
have a cup of coffee before the execution.’ The manner in 
which he climbed the execution rope and the words uttered 
by him have been described earlier. Such was the man 
called Nathuram V. Godse. 


Strange are the ways of life. Nathuram V. Godse’s post 
assassination moves and the stand before the Court being 
what it was, the Government, for their own political 
m ileage, even bestow ed a Kirti Chakra upon one Dev Raj 
Singh for having ‘apprehended’ Godse. The High Court 
finding was that Nathuram had made no attempt to run 


away. 


2. Narayan Dattatraya Apte (Accused No. 2) 
was born in 1911. He was popularly 
known as Nana. Nana’s four brothers, 
Balwant, Vishnu, Madhav, and Manohar, 
were all well occupied in their own 
4 separate professions. Manohar had also 
been abroad for his higher education. 

_ After obtaining his B.Sc., Degree, Nana accepted a 
teacher’s job at Ahmednagar. During his stay at 
Ahmednagar he was married to Shri Phadtare’s daughter. 

At Ahmednagar his innate skill and deep interest in 
teaching attracted pupils to the private tuition classes he 


conducted. He appeared for his B.T. examination and got 
his degree. 


Endowed with a fair complexion and chiselled features, 
with a body slightly tender-built 
was known in his friends circle t 


{female role. 
An | 


, the ever smiling Nana 
o be eminently fitted for a 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused “F161 


OMB a a G 

Faith in and loyalty to Hinduism are seen to be 
inherent at least in the cultured families of Maharashtra. 
.So Nana too was nurtured under these traditional 
domestic influences. 


Nana’s organizing ability and skill were fast 
developing, while his contact with Nathuram was 
maturing through the sessions of the Hindu Mahasabha 
and gradually both of them came to realise that the other 
possessed some rare qualities. So towards the early part. 
of 1944 they both planned to start a daily, called ‘Agran. 
Nana became the manager of the daily, while Nathuram 
its editor. This manager-editor relation of these two was 
to remain steadfast till the end. 


The Government of the time used to get exasperated 
with the Hindu Mahasabha policy of fostering loyalty to 
Hindutwa amongst the Hindus, because the Congress 
Ministries followed the policy of appeasement of the 
Muslims. Security deposits were demanded from ‘Agrani’ 
in quick succession. 


While Gandhiji was staying at Panchagani, a group of 
about twenty-five young men led by Nana staged a protest 
against Gandhiji’s policies on 22nd July 1944. 


Nana planned and executed another such 
demonstration before Gandhiji when he was staying in 
the sweepers’ colony in Delhi, with the object of telling 
him personally not to make any donation to the Muslims 
at the cost of the Hindus, for such a donation was not 
going to appease them; not to accept the partition of India; 
and to learn a lesson from the massacre of the Hindus at 
Noakhali. Gandhiji’s former pledges had all proved futile 
and the land had been vivisected. 

Nana Apte had made a separate Will expressing 
therein, among other things, the desire to immerse his 


remains in the Sind weiyesad 4st,as Nathura n had done. 


162 ¥° Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


On an occasion Nana said to me, “Look, Gopal, from 
the point of view of the deceased it is absolutely immaterial 
how his or her dead body or the ashes are disposed of! But 
the survivors of the deceased are anxious to honour his or . 
her feelings. We do not have a blind faith in our scriptures, 
True, we do customarily immerse our mortal remains into 
the Ganga. But don’t we regard all the rivers of India, 
such equally sacred? Remember, our death’ is of a 
political—more particularly of a national character; as such 
it is but natural that we should cherish feelings of loyalty 
to our nation. But now that you have posed this question 
before us, I must answer it satisfactorily. There are two 
sores which constantly rankle in our hearts. 


This new-born state of Pakistan is a parasite 
weed that has grown rancorously on the land of 
the Hindus sucking their vital life-stream,’ 
thundered Nana with passionate indignation. ‘No 
sooner did it receive the nourishment of 
independence and separate existence, it has started 
inflicting insults on the rest of India. We have 
restricted our remark to things that concern us, 
because that is our limit. May I ask which of all 
the nations of the world has insulted Gandhiji after 
his death ? 


Which one ? 
It’s none other than Pakistan! Do you remember 
the condolence message, sent by Jinnah” 


Yes quite well. A leader of the Hindus has 
passed away. - 

Isn’t it a great insult to Gandhiji ? How ? 

Was it not Jinnah’s duty to show gratitude to 
the man at-least after his death—who for the whole 
of his life suppressed the aspirations only to foster 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused F163 


by his connivance and concessions the fissiparous 
and aggressive designs of the Muslims in India in 
the vain hope of bringing about the Hindu Muslim 
unity ? Had he called - and he did call - Gandhiji to 
be such a leader before the birth of Pakistan, it 
wouldn’t have amounted to an insult to him. For 
that would have been-looked upon as Jinnah’s 
political ruse to achieve his end. That is why we 
earnestly desire that only after the state where 
-Gandhiji was insulted as a ‘Hindu is brought under 
our control with the whole of the river Indus, the 
Sindhu, watering the territories under the sway of 
India, should our remains be immersed in it—the 
sacred river of ours—ours from the very hoary past. 


Shri Shreeprakash was the then Indian High 
Commissioner in Pakistan, who complained with 
tears in his voice that the Government of Pakistan 
didn’t allow the immersion of Gandhiji’s ashes into 
the river Indus. The immersion of Gandhiji’s ashes 
into the river Indus was purely a matter of 
sentiment—and more particularly a matter of 
Hindu sentiment. How could they then tolerate the 
holy water of a holy river in their holy land to be 
polluted by the ashes of a Hindu? 


‘We fondly hoped,’ continued Nana, ‘that our 
Government would preserve one urn containing 
Gandhiji’s ashes to be immersed into the river 
Indus when it was possible for it to do so. But we 
swallowed that insulting refusal of Pakistan quite 
sheepishly.’ 

Nana had told his wife, Soubhagyavati 
Champutai, ‘If you believe in the immortality of 


the soul, then you are and will remain 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


——$ 


P Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


Soubhagyavati even after my death! Move about 
in the society wearing your external symbols of your 
Soubhagya.2 Soubhagyavati Champutai works as 
a teacher in the Kindergarten School conducted by 
the Rani Lakshmibai Smarak Mandal. 


8. Vishnu Ramkrishna Karkare 
(Accused No. 3) had a lodging and boarding 
1 house at Ahmednagar. He was an active 

worker. When Noakhali in Bengal (now 
f in Bangala Desh) had become the 
slaughter house of the Hindus, Karkare, 
with a batch of ten there to mobilise the 
Hindus and adopt a militant posture in their defence. He 
had raised a number of shelter camps under the Hindu 
Mahasabha banner. This was in 1946-47. Vishnu Karkare 
continued his business at Ahmednagar till he expired of 
heart attack on April 6, 1974. His wife looks after the 
business. 


-4, Madan Lal Pahwa (Accused No. 4), 
who had exploded the gun-cotton slab, was 
a refugee. He was a witness to the awful 
events of massacre, loot and arson. 
Carvans, miles together in length and 
comprising lakhs of humans, driven out 
of the hearths and homes, were on their 
‘way to truncated India. Madan Lal has narrated his 
poignant sufferings in his statement before the Court. 


2. ‘Soubhagyavati’ precedes the name of a married Hindu woma? 
whose husband is alive. Mangala Sootra, a kind of necklace of a 
particular design, around the neck and a Kumkum Tilak i.e. a 1° 


mark on the forehead = worn by such a woman, customarily in 
Maharashtra and in the uthe 
CC-0. anaj Deshiiukh REN Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused =y 165 


Madan Lal who married after ‘11s release manages 
hase and sale for some paper mills in Bombay. 


pure 


A 5. Shankar Kistaiya (Accused No. 5) 
| served Digambar Badge, the approver 
(as a personal/domestic servant). 
He expired a few years after his acquittal. 


6. Gopal Godse (Accused No. 6.) 
I had been charged with conspiracy on the 
allegation that I was present at the Birla 
House on January 20. I was convicted for 
abetment and sentenced to transportation 
for life. 

I was born on 12th June 1920. Of the 
four brothers I am the third. At that time, our father was 
posted at Khed (now Rajgurunagar) in Pune district. 
Govind was the youngest. He was born two years later at 
Telegaon in Pune district. The eldest was our sister 
Mathura. Older than me, her other by name was Shanta. 
Both of them are now no more. 

My primary education began at Karjat in Raigarh 
district, and continued at Ratnagiri. After retirement of 
our father, we all settled at Sangli. I passed my 
matriculation. 

I was a volunteer of R.S.S, the Hindu organisation. 
Simultaneously I worked for Hindu Mahasabha as well, 
but without enrolling myself as a member. r 

The Second World War had broken out. I joined Defence 
Services as a Storekeeper in the Indian Army Ordnance 
Corps in 1940. I opted for service on the front, and served 
in Iraq and Iran till April 1944. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


166 ¥ Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


"On my return I got posted at Kirkee and T ay; 
married. The name of my wife is Sindhu. We have im 
daughters, one called Vidyullata and the other Asilata. 
When I was arrested in February 1948, the elder 
daughter was two years and the younger one was only 
three or four months old. Sindhu alone was shouldering 
the responsibilities of both father and mother while 
rearing up the daughters. 


My elder brother, Dattatraya (expired on 10.9. 1990), 
who was next to Nathuram, was running an engineering 
workshop, called the ‘Udyam Engineering’, where 
Sindhu was employed. Initially she lived in the same 
family, but later on she set up a separate home for 
herself and her daughters. She started a small workshop 
of her own named ‘Pratap Engineering.’ 


It is a tradition of history that when a revolutionary 
is imprisoned his relatives and dependents have to 
undergo untold hardships of various types. 


Shri Dattatraya, had converted his ‘Udyam 
Engineering’ into a limited Company just before the 
assassination on Gandhiji. As Shri Dattatraya had been 
put under arrest, his wife, Smt. Sarojini looked after 
the household affairs quite ably. 


While the Goa-liberation movement was in full 
Swing several youths had courageously participated in 
it. In a batch of seven there was a young boy, named 
Narayan Dattatraya Kulkarni. This loving young boy, 
had one thing which constantly pricked his mind.— 
Unfortunately he had not received the motherly 
affection while the grew up. Sindhu made good this want 
of motherly love for him; and today Nana lives with us 


as our adopted son. During my term in jail and after 
my release. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused “¥ 167 
——— I 


D 7. Digambar Badge (Accused No. 7), 
Digambar Badge was originall Accused 
©) No. 7, but he formally turned approver. 
No. 7 was allotted to Savarkar. Digambar 
Badge was a Hindu Sanghatanist and a 
dealer in arms. He had a conviction that 
Hindus should be armed in the pockets in 
which ihes were in minority and should be able to retailiate— 
in case of attack from the Muslims. The prosecution 
claimed that it was Badge who had supplied the gun-cotton 
slab ignited. by Madan Lal. A hand grenade too was 
’ recovered from Madan Lal. Some more ammunition was 
recovered from Badge. 

After his discharge from the custody Digambar Badge 
was given service in the Police Department. He has since 
retired. 


» 8. Vinayak Damodar Savarkar (Accused 
Í No. 8). Out of the nine accused produced 
| before the Special Court, Red Fort, Delhi, 
| in the Gandhi. Murder Case, 
Swatantryaveer Vinayak Damodar 
Savarkar was originally Accused No. 8. 
As mentioned before, on the 27th May 
_ 1948 all the accused were brought before the Special Court 
for the first time. Digambar Ramchandra Badge, accused 
No. 7, had turned an Approver. So he was formally 
removed from the docks and consequently the numbers of 
the other accused moved up. Savarkar therefore became 
accused No. 7. 


' Vinayak Damodar Savarkar was born on 28.5.1883 
at Bhagoor, a village near Nasik, a district town in - 
Maharashtra. Nasik is famous for its religious importance. 
As Savarkar birth place, Bhagoor too became a shrine for 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Ke Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


the devotees of Swaraj. Vinayak’s father Damodar wasa 
landlord in its humble meaning. Vinayak had an elder 
brother by the name Ganesh and a younger one called 
Narayan. Vinayak’s mother Radha was a household lady, 


Vinayak had a sharp memory. He could recite verses 
with little effort. This formed the basis for him to compose 
poetry in subsequent years. From the childhood itself, 
Vinayak showed a tendency of organising boys of his age 
and engaging them in the programmes for liberation of 
the country from the British yoke. He had named the 
groups as Mitra Mela’ (gathering of friends). 


At Bhagoor was a Deity; Goddess Bhagwati having 
eight arms. Vinayak, who was hardly fifteen years of age, 
vowed before the Goddess that he would take a fight 
against the Britishers to overthrow them and in that course 
he would fight to the last drop of his blood. 


Vinayak had his primary education at Bhagoor and 
then at Nasik. After matriculation he went to Pune and 
joined Ferguson College. He continued his organisational 
work at Pune too, among the college students. On occasions 
he consulted the then leaders like Lokmanya Tilak and 
Shivram Mahadev Paranjpe. 


In 1906, Vinayak organised a bonfire of foreign clothes 
in Pune. It was the first act of open revolt against the 
purchase of the British goods. 


Vinayak graduated. himself from the Ferguson College. 
He desired to go to England for the study of Law and 
become a barrister. A scholarship was sponsored by Pandit 
Shaymjee Krishna Varma. Lokmanya Tilak recommended 
Vinayak for the scholarship. 


Vinayak reached England and here he had a broader 
field now to plant patriotism in the youths from different 
Provinces. Besides he wrote for ‘Kal’ a periodical of S.M. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused 169 


nE å S 
Paranjpe. The language of his news letters was fiery, and 
yet written skillfully. 


Madan Lal Dhingra, the youth who shot dead Corzen 
Waily on 22nd June 1909, was sentenced to death. The 
statement found in Madan Lal Dhingra’s pocket was 
suppressed by the police. Savarkar arranged its publication 
in a daily a day before Madan Lal Dhingra’s execution, 
i.e. on 16th August 1909: The title was ‘Challenge’ meaning 
that the Police should say as to whether or not this was 
the statement they had seized from Madan Lal Dhingra 
upon his arrest. Madan Lal Dhingra was executed at 
Bristol prison on 17th August 1909. 


In India, Anant Kanhere, a 17 years old boy, 
assassinated the Collector of Nasik, Mr. Jackson, on 22nd 
December, 1909. Savarkar was arrested in London on 
13.3.1910 and brought to India to face trial for this case. 
On the way, at Marseilles in France, Savarkar jumped 
from the ship and went to the shore, but he was 
apprehended and taken back to the ship. 


Savarkar, along with thirtyfour others, was charged 
with sedition. On 24.12.1910 he was sentenced to 
transportation for life. He was also charged with 
participation in Jackson assassination case. On 30.1.1911 
he was again sentenced to transportation for life. The 
sentences were ordered to run consecutively. 


Savarkar was transported to Andamans—(Kala Pani) 
on 1.7.1911 where he remained for ten years. In May 1921 
Vinayak was brought back and lodged in Yeravada (Pune) 
Jail for about three years. On 6.1.1924 Vinayak was shifted 
to Ratnagiri and lodged there with some restrictions until 
1937 when he was finally released. 

Since the day Savarkar was released from the detention 
at Ratnagiri, Savarkarism and Gandhism came to grips 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


170 Why I Assassinated Gandhi 
openly. In addition to his life-mission of attaining nationa] 
independence, now Savarkar had to undertake another 
programme ofrefuting this lopsided principle of non-violence; 
which was dinned into the people’s ears day in and day out; 
The constructive aspect of Savarkar’s programme wag 
organizing the Hindus—‘Hindu-Sanghatan’,- 

The Hindu Mahasabha was a new entrant in the field 
of Indian politics. Savarkar was elected as the President 
of the Hindu Mahasabha to preside over the session at 
Karnavati i.e. Ahmedabad, held in December 1937. 


Savarkar had a strong foresight. His call to the young 
Indians to join the British army with a view to learn the 
techniques of the modern warfare and the modern weapons 

-and not to lose the God sent opportunity of being war— 
worthy and equipped them with arms; leaving to the 
opportune time to teach them against whom these arms 
were to be used. It was deliberately and mischievously 
distorted and ridiculed by the Congress with its well set 
up propaganda machinery, which could very easily publish 
in a perverse manner that the Hindu Mahasabha was anti- 
independence, that it was revisionist and retrograde. 


As early as 1942, in his Kanpur address, Savarkar 
had predicted that the Congress was going to vivisect the 


country and warned the nation against it. And, five years 
later, it came true. 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other-Accused F171 


from going to Pakistan which was their own creation. He 

‘was watchful of the events and prophetic in his utterances. 
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar came to be known as 
Swatantrya Veer because of his ceaseless efforts and 
sufferings, boldness and courage, guidance and advice for - 
achieving Swaraj. 

Gandhiji was assassinated on 30.1.1948. On the next 
day, large scale arrests of Hindu leaders and others 
commenced. In the ensuing few weeks as many as 10,000 
persons were arrested under the Preventive Detention Act. 
All of them, were only Hindus. Savarkar’s house was 
searched. Files and papers were seized for scrutiny. While 
Savarkar remained in. preventive detention, his family 
friends and associates were kept under surveillance. 


One can safely infer that prior to the independence, 
the Congress Government under Pandit Nehru’s 
leadership was examining how to ensure their survival in 
power after independence. After the assassination, which 
was little over five months after independence, they were 
quick to gauge the general Hindu sentiment. They had to 
proceed about their task to ensure their survival with a 
little more care. For that two things were considered by 
them as necessary: 

G) divide the Hindus on caste lines. 

Gi) appease the Muslims. 

Savarkar had always a firm preachment that there 
could be no distinguishing between one Hindu and another 
on caste lines and there should be no appeasement of any 
section or community for political gains. Therefore, they 
decided that instead of giving an ‘Award’ to Veer Savarkar, 
for his contribution towards India’s independence, they 
should implicate him in the Gandhi murder case so that 
his arrest, pending trial coupled with diversion of energies 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


TF Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


towards defence of the case, could give them a much needed 
breather to carry out their aforesaid object of dividing the 

Hindus on caste lines, appeasing the Muslims and also 
try and put forward their own confidants (sycophants) as 
ostensible Hindu leaders. The object being to somehow 
shift the Hindu focus from one man to several persons of 
their own installation. 

Since a thorough search of the papers seized from Veer 
Savarkar’s house, (documents and correspondence dating 
from 1938 and running into 143 files with 10,000 papers), 
and other investigations did not reveal anything 
incriminating, they used third degree method against 
Badge, promised him pardon and the result was that police 
had a statement from Badge implicating Savarkar. Later 
on, therefore, the arrest of Savarkar was converted from 
one under Preventive Detention Act to an accused in the 
Gandhi Murder case. The trial took its time and effort 
and all this while Savarkar remained in prison. A year 
later, the day of the judgment dawned. Savarkar was 
acquitted. 


A huge crowd of people had assembled to greet 
Savarkar outside Red Fort. The exonerated Savarkar was 
stepping out of the historic Red Fort. The oceanlike crowd 


was visibly moved and it embraced Savarkar with the sky- 
rending shouts of: 


Swatantrya Lakshmi Ki Jai! 
(Victory of the Goddess of Freedom) 
Akhand Bharat Amar Rahe! 

(Long live Undivided India) 
Swatantryaveer Savarkar Ki Jai! 
(Victory to Swa. Savarkar) 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused “3173 . 


— Veer Savarkar had inaugurated the Calcutta Session 
of the Hindu Maha Sabha after his release in the year 
1949, at which Shri N.B. Khare was elected President. 
After 1950, his ailing health prevented him from taking 
part in public functions. It was only on rare occasions, 
that he addressed public meetings. 


In 1957, he addressed the gathering in Delhi to 
commemorate the centenary of the first War of 
Independence fought in 1857. His speech was touching. 
He said: 


you have followed me so far in spite of the fact that 
in return you did not get any honour or wealth. What 
you got in return was imprisonment, gallows, hatred 
from the people and curses from the secularists. And 
yet you did not forsake this path and followed it to 
the end with all your might. This spirit of yours 
will certainly lead the Hindus to achieve their 
cultural independence. 


In subsequent years he delivered lectures on Hindu 
History. They have been compiled as ‘Six Glorious 
Epoches.’ 


The people felicitated Veer Savarkar in the year 1960, 
and named the occasion as ‘Mrityunjaya Din.’ If two 
consecutive punishments of transportation for life were to 
be executed in his case he was to see the free world in that 
year. As Savarkar outlived the scheduled release year, 
the occasion was named as ‘Mrityunjaya’ (one who over- 
powered the deity of Death). 

In the beginning of February 1966 while running his 
83rd year, Savarkar decided that soul ought to be freed 
from the human body. He gave up food and confined 
himself to meditation. Before that, he had written: 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


a Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


I have done everything possible with my humble 

strength for the sake of my people, nation. However 

life has its own limitation. When the limbs could 

no more be burdened with any task, surrender to 

Nature is the only honourable way. Let me be free 

now from the wrapper of the body I possess.. 

Veer Savarkar breathed his last on Feb. 26, 1966, at 
Bombay, ironically, after suffering the rigours of sentences 
‘and detention both during the British Rule and also when 
India was free. His fault: l 

He fought for independence of India, opposed the 

vivisection and the vivisectionists, urged for just 
rights for the Hindus, and countered the division of 

Hindus on caste lines. 


Many of his statements have been compiled in a book 
by Shri G.M. Joshi and Balarao Savarkar. The: book is 
called ‘Historic Statements by V.D. Savarkar’. 


A word more about him. The freedom struggle was no 
single man’s effort. It was a collective effort of thousands, 
and of the millions who were behind those thousands. 

_ Savarkar was one of them. He is, however, in one sense 
more fortunate, for Savarkar’s soul has been spared the 
indignation of false claims to credit by the politicians of 
today, for what were his sacrifices. It is sad to see that 
credit for the sacrifice made by many a genuine national 
patriotic figure, be it Bhagat Singh, Uttam Chand, Madan 
Lal Dhingra, Khudi Ram, Rash Behari or even Subhash 

t only patriots in the true sense, 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Profile of Nathuram Godse and of The Other Accused 3175 


of the same block, before a nation which has been a 
calculated victim of little education and social divisions. 
It is because Savarkar was too well known and his 
writings too profuse, that his contributions have been 
spared such misuse. The day when he was jailed and the 
day when he was released, or even his birth or death 
anniversary, all go without politically sponsored public 
meetings addressed by politicians wearing Gandhi caps, 
and followed by a long coverage on the Television/ 
Doordarshan and the Radio. At least this ensures that his 
soul rests in peace. . ee 
9. Dr. Dattatraya Sadashiv Parchure (Accused No. 9) 
was a qualified doctor. He practised at Gwalior. He was 
‘an able organiser. He met attacks by the Muslims by 
counter attacks. He was involved on the charge that 
` Nathuram obtained the pistol from him. A confession was 
extracted from him under pressure. The High Court 
acquitted him. He was married and stayed in his own 
house with his family. He expired in the year 1986. 


There were three.more accused cited by the 
prosecution. They were Gangadhar Dandavate, Ganga 
dhar Jadhao and Surya Dev Sharma, all from Gwalior. 
They were declared absconders. Their prosecution 
depended on Dr. Parchure’s,conviction. Dr. Parchure was 
acquitted by the High Court on 22nd June 1949. The three 
thereafter surrendered themselves to the police, the police 
produced them before the local Magistrate, who discharged 
them of any prosecution. 

Gangadhar Dandavate is No more. Gangadhar Jadhao 
stays at Nagpur. Surya Dev Sharma is at Dattiya (M.P.). 
He was returned to Madhya Pradesh Assembly twice. 

Q 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


THE TERM IN PRISON 


While the matter was before the High Court and til] 
the execution of Nathu Ram and Apte, we were in Ambala 
Jail. After the execution of Nathu Ram and Apte, Karkare 
and myself were taken to Nasik Road Central Prison in a 
separate cage-type bogie called the prisoners’ bogie, We 
reached Nasik Central Jail on the 19th of May 1950. 


The rationing system in the country affected the food 
served in the Jail too. Red jawar, which is of a very inferior 
quality, and a liquid paste made of the same jawar flour 
were continuously served. Dal (pulse) and vegetable were 
served alternately as side dishes alongwith the bread of 
jawar. As a supplementary food item a mixture of cereals 
was served sometimes. Fourteen meals a week was the 


schedule, one of which consisted of rice and one of wheat 
chapaties. 


From the method of our work and the progress we made 
in it and the skill we showed in executing the jobs the 
officers in the Jail felt that we should be utilized in some 
productive activity. It was decided to start a soap factory 
in the Nasik Jail. It was started on the 19th August 1955. 

Later still an ink factory that was being run in the 
Thane Jail was shifted to the Nasik Jail after a full 
deliberation for about a year and half. This factory was 
also started in the same ward No. 1. 


The cases of long term prisoners are put up for 
consideration before the Advisory Board. If in the 


iora consideration after one or two years did not arise. 
7 our cases Were put up before the Advisory 
.CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


_ 


The Term in Prison “8177 
Board as per rules, and were directed to be put up again 

after two years! In 1956 they were again deferred to one 
year more. 

On the first Republic Day of India we had been given 
as a part of general amnesty forty months’ remission, 
which cannot be annulled. We were given remission every 
year for good conduct. Remission for the extra work we 
had put in from time to time and whenever we had been 
offered an option of preferring money or remission we had 
invariably opted for remission. Although there is a rule 
that the total period of remission should not exceed one 
third of the total period of the sentence and that if it does, 
it had to be specially sanctioned by the Government, the 
remission granted as general amnesty was an exception 
to this rule. 


In the meanwhile on 16th of December 1956 Karkare 
was medically examined, because for the preceding seven 
or eight days he had shown signs of having been suffering 
from consumption. While I was under sentence I had 
donated blood seven times. For every donation of blood a 
remission of sentence by ten days is granted. Twice I 
donated blood and asked for the remission. At other five 
different times I had donated blood as pure ‘donation’. But 
the Jail Superintendent did not make good his written 
assurance of twenty days’ remission of sentence, but 
pointed to the Government. 


On the 11th of April 1957 we received the decision on 
the report about our fourteen years imprisonment, which 
said that the question of our release would be taken up for 
consideration after the completion of fifteen years actual 
imprisonment. It was really a knock-down blow dealt at 
us. This certainly was not in keeping with any procedure 
of the Prison Code in force at that time. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 
ee 


178 & Why | Assassinateg Gandhi 
The Government may well be proud of how th 
deceived a convict in the Gandhi Murder case by Exercising 
their authority, how they made fun of him, how they toi 
revenge on him by causing him mental distress, how they 
behaved cruelly with him. Nobody ever mustered courage 
to suggest that constant repression of this sort was 
inhuman. Perhaps they feared that in case they said so 
plainly and boldly they might themselves be charged with 
having harid in the conspiracy to murder Gandhiji. 


ey easi] 


My parents, worn out with age and vexed with worries, 
came to understand by this Government’s decision that 
they were not destined to see Gopal freed from the prison 
in their life-time which was running out so-fast. 


My parents, once again came to the Nasik Central Jail 
to see me for the last time. My mother bent down with 
age, could not climb the steps straight on her feet; she 
almost crouched up the steps. My mother became a mental 
wreck and bedridden on reaching home. She breathed her 
last on the 6th of May 1957, My father too died after a few 
minutes. 

Decision about my release, that is to say, how long I 
was not going to be released was received and for some 
days I lost all peace of mind. I knew only one thing, that 
injustice was done to me and that the court was an 
institution to do away with that injustice, 


_ Imade up my mind to plead my own case myself and 
in December 1957 I sent my first petition to the Supreme 
Court. My efforts to get justice in the Supreme Court were 
like an exercise in copying letters for good hand-writing. 
This went on continuously and I was enduring all these 
defeats. During the seven years from December 1957 to 


August 1964 I made not less than twenty-two petitions to 
the Supreme Court. : 


ji hmukh Library, BUP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 
Reaenrmncierenanallegs UKN Library, BUF, Jammu: Digitize —_— 


The Term in Prison “F179 


It was impossible for me to engage a lawyer. Sometimes 
I did consult some pleaders, but when they saw that the 
Supreme Court had set aside several of my petitions they 
could not muster up their courage to argue the case. Court’s 
decision was that as Section 401 Cr.P.c. authorises the 
Government to exercise the power of clemency, the 
Government alone could release the prisoner undergoing 
life-sentence. 


Eighth petition of mine was heard on the 14th of 
November 1960. On the 12th of January 1961 the decision 
was given. While defining the sentence the Judges had 
relied on a decision given by the Privy Council thirty years 
ago. The said decision of the Privy Council was that there 
was no difference between ‘transportation’ and 
‘imprisonment’, the term ‘imprisonment’ being only the 
other name for ‘transportation’, and hence it was just the 
same whether the prisoner was sent to the Andaman Jail 
or kept in any Jail in India. The Supreme Court accepted 
this judgment as a standard one and weighty enough to 
depend upon and hence the Judges on the Bench didn’t go 
deeper. But the Supreme Court went a step further to say 
that ‘transportation for life’ or ‘imprisonment for life’ must 
prima facie be treated as transportation or imprisonment 
for the whole of the remaining period of the convicted 
Person's natural life. The crux of the decision was that as 
nobody knew the exact day of the prisoner's death, it was 
not possible to deduct remission from it, and therefore, no 
dispute about the completion of sentence inclusive of the 
Temission could be raised. I decided to approach the 
Supreme Court one again. 

I began to write a new petition discussing all the 
Matters relevant to, and bearing on, my contention, 
Particularly the origin and implementation of, and the 
Subsequent changes made in, the sentences of death, of 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


1807 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


for life, rigorous imprisonment and simple imprisonment 
and so on and so forth and the use of New South Wales in 
Australia, and the Andamans for transportation of 
convicts, the penal servitude prevalent some centuries ago, 
the origin of the practice of granting remission, and its 
object, criminal tendencies of man-kind, origin and practice 
of maintaining prisons by governments, defects in the 
thinking of the Privy Council, and the discrepancies in 
the observations made by the Supreme Court, etc. I now 
decided to send my petition in the form of a thesis under 
the caption, ‘Has A Life-Convict To Die in Prison Under 
the Indian Law? My petition had run to 175 pages. It was 
‘submitted to the Supreme Court on the 28th of October 
1961 and numbered as 16 of 1962 and thereafter turned 
down. 


I was shifted from Nasik to the Aurangabad Jail on 
the 20th of January 1962. My wife had written in reply to 
me on the 16th of August 1962. 


I do believe, Gopal, that we too are bound to enjoy the 
same happiness of deliverance one of these days. But we 
_are still to fill the measure of hardships, humiliation, 
contempt, mental agonies and the pangs of separation to 
the full till the moment of deliverance dawns.’ 


So rise once again to your full height! It is quite natural 
for a man in your situation to feel disheartened with the 
thought that all your efforts have proved bootless. Did the 
scientists give up their attempts and sit idle because they 
had to meet with failure with all their experiments to 
extract oil from stone? 


Even if the whole world turns its back on you, be su 
that Pm always at your back, why, just beside you! Lets 
try once again. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


The Term in Prison 181 


o o O O 

I had completed fifteen years of my imprisonment 
without counting the period of remission on the 9th of 
February 1964. Even when hemmed in from all sides and 
in a state of utter mental distraction, I pursued my appeals 
to the Supreme Court quite relentlessly. I signed a 
declaration on 14.8.1964. I was presented before the 
Supreme Court on 28.9.1964. The matter was discussed 
in the court for twenty minutes. They took a unanimous 
decision to ask the Government to present itself at the 
preliminary hearing. The case was adjourned to 
19.10.1964. 


It was Saturday, the 10th of October 1964. The then 
Home Minister of India, Shri Gulzarilal Nanda was 
reported to be visiting the Delhi Jail, to address the 
prisoners, who would be assembled in the open-air-theatre. 


After seeing one or two divisions of the jail, Shri Nanda 
inquired about me. In the evening I was taken to the office. 
What would you do after you are released ? asked Shri 
Nanda. I replied: The question does not arise as yet. But if 
at all Iam released, I shall enter politics. I wish you well.’ 
said Shri Nanda, and our meeting ended. 


The Tuesday of 13.10.1964 had dawned and our cells 
had been opened. A little time had elapsed, when a jailor 
came and stood in front of me. 


The order for your release has come. Pack-up your 
things. You are to be let out before seven thirty. 


The Superintendent granted me audience. I signed 
Wherever necessary in the record book. I was issued a 
Warrant of transportation. My luggage was inspected and 
was kept outside. I stepped out of the prison house with 
the premature old age on my shoulders and breathed the 
first dough of free air. Karkare and Madan Lal too were 


released from their respective prisons. 
\ CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


182 ¥ Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


I entrained Dehradun Express and went to Pune via 
Kalyan. My people greeted me at Kalyan. 

While I was being greeted with the pancharaties (five 
lamps of ghee customarily used for reception) my heart 
was chocked with emotions. I did not try to check them, 
but allowed the gushing tears to roll down my cheeks, 
Wasn't there anybody to address me in the affectionate 
singular? I felt an insatiate hunger for it. 


Three elder members of my family who could addresg 
me in singular in their own right had already passed away, 
My mother, my father, and Nathuram! The moment | 
remembered them I went inside and bowed down to their 
photographs. 

On 19.10.1964 I attended the Supreme Court. My 
petition came for hearing. I stood up. My new appendage 
had also been read by the judges. The court found no 
necessity of considering the original petition as the release 


had been effected, and had rendered the petition 
infructuous. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


LIFE AFTER RELEASE 
It was a long gap of about seventeen years, from 
February 1948 to September 1964. I had entered the free . 


world again. I had assumed that the role of incarceration 
in my life was over for good. 


But it was not to be so. My friends had greeted me, | 
and arranged a small ceremony. Late Shri G.V. Ketkar, 
then the Editor of Tarun Bharat, a Marathi daily was the 
chief guest. He had said in his speech that he had tried to 
dissuade Nathuram from his thought of assassinating 
Gandhiji. = Sais 

That statement of his gave rouse to the biased papers. 
In consequence, Karkare and myself along with ten others 
including Shri Ketkar were taken prisoners under the 
Defence of India Act then prevailing. We both suffered a 
year’s imprisonment without any charge. 


Due to my participation in the episode of the Gandhi 
assassination, I felt, I had become a page of the 
contemporary history. The history was hidden by the 
hypocritical rulers. It was for me that I as the page of 
history should expose myself to the public. The people may 
like the page or they may not. The page ‘remains 
unchanged. With this conviction, I started to write about 
the episode. Late G.V. Behere, the editor of Painjan, a 
Marathi monthly took upon himself to publish the series. 
On completion he published the series in a book form titled 
‘Gandhi Hatya Ani Mee’ (Gandhi assassination and I) in 
October 1967. 


The Government being allergic to the truth which 
exposed their falsehood, banned the book two months later, 


The first edition was almost exhausted by then. 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


184% Why | Assassinated Gandhi 

The Maharastra High Court, Bombay was approachoj 
by Shri Behere and myself with a plea of injustice to our 
right of the freedom of speech. The Court consisting of 
Modi, V.S. Desai and Chandrachud JJ in their unanimous 
judgment struck down the ban on 6.8.1969. 


' I then published other books. The statement of | 
Nathuram Godse had been kept under ban by the 
government. I challenged the ban by publishing the 
statement first in Marathi and then in English, and also 
in other languages. The ban could not survive. 

I am associated with the Akhil Bharat Hindu 
Mahasabha for my political views. As for my family, my 
daughters got married in usual course. So also Nana, the 
‘adopted son. They all have their respective occupations. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


EPILOGUE 


Nathuram Godse’s statement covered Gandhiji’s 
policies and actions till 30.1.1948. Whether the future 
events proved Nathuram’s analysis thereof as being correct 

-or not, is one question, and what those policies came to 
mean for the people of this country is the other. A few 
words on this, is what I seek to say by way of an epilogue. 


The 45 years that elapsed since, only re-confirmed what 
was stated by Nathuram. The turn of history did not find 
a single word out of his lengthy statement as being either 
erroneous or unwarranted. 

Gandhiji’s physical life ended on 30.1.1948, but the 
legacy of his politics, serving as they did, the purpose of 
ensuring easy continuance in power, coupled with the 
additional benefits of personal aggrandisement and 
dynastic perpetuation, were conveniently adopted by those 
at the helm, even if it meant sacrificing the lot of the 
Nation. That the success of the Ruler lay in the welfare of 
the ruled, was a principle that was now over shadowed by 
the adoption of so called Gandhian policies. 


If India was to be a secular state, where was the need 
for Pakistan ? And, if there had to be vivisection on 
communal lines, then where was the need or reason for 
maintaining a anti-Hindu stance in the garb of secularism 
? -are questions, that need an answer, 

Secularism, in the true and honest sense of the word, 
is tolerance of another belief and nothing more, but the 
Gandhian brand of secularism, and as it survived the 30th 
January 1948, was not one of tolerance but one of 
appeasement. Inspite of the failures inherent therein and 


he Nation. 
the long term harm caused by this policy to t j 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


Fee Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


such appeasement continues simply because it serves 
political ends. 

Prior to the independence, Hindu-Muslim unity wag 
announced as a means and Swaraj as the goal. The means 
shattered when partition was accepted. The Muslims 
achieved their Swaraj (in Pakistan) andin India the bogie 
put forward was secularism. 


The leaders, full of ego, did not confess to their folly. 
In a truncated, India the rights of the Hindus have been 
curbed one after the other, by an irresponsible leadership 
taking cover behind Gandhian policies. This is what 
Nathuram Godse had analysed and predicted, and this is 
exactly what we are forced to see day after day. 


Kashmir was termed as an ‘ideal Secular State’, but 
the Hindus in the valley have now been reduced to almost 
zero. The aggressors are now advancing towards Jammu 
to eliminate the Hindu population: This is the result of 
the fraudulent secularism practiced by the leaders at helm. 


The opposition.to the settlement in Kashmir of 
Refugees from Pakistan, and the subsequent handling of 
the Kashmir issue has left things in a sorry plight. All 
this is going to be a grotesque and highly volatile legacy 
and a burden on the generations to come. 


Three Wars were fought with Pakistan. At what cost 
and what was the end result? In the ultimate analysis, 
the problem remains and continues to fester dangerously. 


To say thata Particular Hindu should be discriminated 

or denied an entitlement including respect, on account of 

: his being born into a particular caste, was a voice heard 
from some quarters, too few in number, but whatever and 
wherever such sentiments may have been voiced, with the 
preachings of people like Guru Nanak, Dayanand, 


Savark ; ne 
ar and many others, such thoughts werebeginning 


en F187 
— a a A 
to be effectively neutralised. Nathuram Vinayak Godse 
too was a firm believer that all men are equal; that caste 
made no difference and the only thing did make a difference 
between man and man, was a person’s honesty, 


intelligence, and hard work. 


However, securing political sinecures and ends was a 
strategy that required the creation of differences on caste 
lines. Such schisms were first contrived and created, and 
then the propaganda machinery used to blow them up out 
of all proportion. Once such divisions came to exist, first a 
‘sympathy’ service, and thereafter, a policy of 
‘appeasement’ was adopted so as to achieve political 
mileage. It was in this garb that such policies served their 
best purpose and the Gandhian label endowed these 
policies with a sanctity of sorts. But what the followers of 
Gandhiji seek to achieve is not equality or removal of any 
disability, but a state of affairs where caste considerations 
override those of individual competence, hard-work and 
integrity, as a result of which, the basic criteria shifts away 
from individual ability and thus serves the twin purpose 
of first creating the divide, and then topping it up, with 
appeasement. 

After all the policy as implemented meant, identify a 
section that gives hopes of serving as a vote-bank, start 
by- dinning in their ears that they have been unfairly 
treated and at times even try and plant a ‘leader’ for that 
section, follow it up with endless sympathy and then grant 
concessions and benefits at public expense and promise 
still more, the lure of the more, serving as the ideal bait to 
ensure continuity of the vote. 

The so-called Gandhian policies of highlighting the 
communal and the caste divide, found themselves a 
convenient extension in the early 1960s when we saw the 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


498" i: Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


linguistic vivisection of the country. This was even followed 
by an attempt at the Hindu-Sikh divide in early 1980s. 
Every possible means at their disposal were used in order 
to make the criminal and anti-social elements of both these 
communities go for each others throats. It is fortunate that 
the people i.e. both Hindus and Sikhs saw through this 
game and came to realise that all this was nothing but 
political manoeuvring. 

The lamentable trend of ‘keeping the people poor and 
tin-educated’ is best illustrated by the calculated use of 
‘austerity, as advocated by Gandhi, to indirectly 
institutionalise poverty and the basic survival of the toiling 
masses of India, as a means of evading public 
accountability and answerability. The linguistic vivisection 
only ensured insufficient education of the masses. To keep 
growth of prosperity at a low key, the public sector with 
its gigantic losses came in handy. 


This enduring poverty, commemorated two and a half 
decades after the death of Gandhi, by the slogan of ‘Garibi 
Hatao’, ensured the easy continuity of those in power. 
‘Garibi’ nevertheless remains to stalk the length and. 
breadth of the Nation, and for solace to the Garib, the 
austere example of Gandhijiis put forward. Administrative 
and public utility institutions are being rendered 
worthless. Welfare of the people has lost its meaning. This 
is what we witness in post-independence India. 


The laws which were framed from time to time, gave a 
number of additional benefits to the Muslims, keeping 
them ‘under exemption’ from the general laws. 

, Such laws, by and large, have been all directed at 
giving undue advantage to the Muslim community. Apart 
from the refusal to put forward a uniform civil code, even 
n number of, otbermatterssif, thenlaveszéhabdaawe been 


framed from 1950 upto date, are examined, the ‘Gandhian 
tinge’ will be more than evident in the pro-Muslim tilt of 
such enactments. ; 

For instance, laws regarding Wakf properties of the 
Muslims have been made so as to liberally cover properties 
and exempt them from the Ceiling and Rent laws, but no 
such benefits are given to Hindu institutions. Another 
instance relates to the gifts of property. 

The Supreme Court in the Shah Bano’s case, took a 
progressive and practical view, but the Government lost 
no time to once again upset this view, simply because they 
wanted to keep the minority appeased. 


It is strange that birthday of Prophet Mohammad as 
also of Mahatma Gandhi should both be declared as 
National holidays, but for ‘Ram Naumi’ the birthday of 
Lord Ram, no such declaration is made. 

How illegal immigrants from Pakistan and Bangla 
Desh are still welcomed and unauthorised colonies are put 
up for them just because they serve as vote banks, is yet 
another instance of an application of this Gandhian legacy. 
Family Planning schemes too, are directed only against 
the Hindus. 


Even the Archeological Survey of India seems to be 
not so kind and benevolent to structures of Hindu origin 
or design as they are to others, and if statistics are 
examined, the extent of protection granted by them will 
be predominantly Islamic. Structures, which in 1700-1947, 
were lying not only derelict but almost fallen with ravages 
of time, are being restored with extensive investments 
thereon. One wonders what is the source of funds and what 
use these may he put to, on some day in future. 


Mankind is not new and it is for history to write what 
mankind has been all about. The last 45 years are still 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


-_ Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


fresh in our memories and the circumstances that obtained 
continue to be in sharp focus. Truly, the real sufferers have 
been the Hindus of India, the victims have also been the 
Hindus, and, far from correcting a few misplaced Practices 
and rituals that had creeped into the system over the years, 
today, the aim of those in power continues to be to divide, 
sub-divide and sub-sub-divide. To create conflicts, and to 
seek to appease those who serve vested political purposes, 
All this in the fraudulent context of policies fancied to be 
‘Gandhian’. The actual goal being purely political and even 
personal. 5 
The ‘personality cult? where factors of reason and logic 
and the attendant vote, give way, leaving everything at 
the obstinacy or ego of the so called leader, were subject 
matter of criticism by N athuram, and this is another 
Gandhian legacy that survives till today. 


Prices have risen multifold, and there has been 
inflation from 1948 continuously till now. How the value 
of the Indian Rupee has fallen against international 
currencies such as the US Dollar or the Pound Sterling 
during this period, is a matter which hurts one and all. 
Corruption is endemic in day to day life, and this is, what 
we see as the end result of the application of such policies. 


Law and order situation has deteriorated to a startling 
low, while unemployment is at a high. Moral degradation 
is what we see all-round. It is irony, of sorts or of fate, 
that the wearing of khadi with a Gandhi cap on top, has 
come to operate as giving the wearer a licence to operate 
outside the rule of law and morality. 

While environmentalists talk of air pollution, how 
much pollution has been caused to our system by this 
Gandhian cult’ as the Prevailing criminalisation of the 


Nation’s: Politics and corruption in the public 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


a 


Epilogue 

administration demonstrates, perha 
enlightened citizen or some instrume 
plight of the common man and the vista the country 
presents today, in comparison to Germany, J apan, Korea 
or Taiwan, has only a Gandhian story to tel], 


At the end, all one can say is, that Nathuram Godse’s 
statement made 45 years back, included Within it a 
warning. That was one of the main reasons for it being 
banned, Had this warning been paid heed to, the country 
in general and the Hindus in particular, may not have 
been in the position that they are today in. Precisely, where 
India as a nation would have reached in the 45 years after 
independence, had this legacy of misplaced and fraudulent 
policies not been left.behind, would be, for erudite 
economists to expatiate, and not for a convict in the Gandhi 
assassination case, to dwell upon. 


191 
PS, some day, some 
nt shall measure, The 


Every year on November 15, a gathering is held at the 
Pune residence of the author to reaffirm the ultimate wish 
in Nathuram’s will to immerse the ashes in the river Sindhu 
only when she flows back freely into Akhand Bharat.’ The 
reaffirming is also done in many other cities. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


192 f° Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
The Will 


The Will of Nathuram is in the form\ of a letter in Hindi, 
addressed: to Shri Dattatraya Vinayak Godse, his younger 
brother. The Magistrate put a seal over it on November 15, 
1949. The Jail authorities passed on the letter to Shri 
Dattatraya. 
Nathuram left behind only valuable property-his ashes ang 
instructed how to dispose them of. The will was in Hindi and 
an English translation there of appears on the next page, 


My dear Dattatraya, 


If you are allowed to perform last rites of my body you may 
perform them in any manner. But I am to express herewith a 
specific wish. 

The river Indus (Sindhu), on the banks of which our pre- 
historic Rishis composed the Vedas is the one 
Bharatvansha i.e. — 


of our 


= again foe ata ender the aegis 


That will be the sacred day for us. 


sthan. 


It hardly matters even if it too 
zare 


ealisimg my wish oe ae ashe 


n 


nslating my desire i Into 


Government lifts } 


Ne 
Ourt. i FOU Ff: 
“st, + GUCHOrISe Vou to 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


from Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs 


Justice G. D. Khosla 
The Chief Justice of India decided to constitute a bench of tiree 


Judges to hear the appeal by Godse and his accomplices. The 


ae were Justice Bhandar, Justice Achhruram and Justice 
- D. Khosla. : . 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


From Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs* 


Nathuram Godse shot at Mahatma Gandhi, while he 
was going to his prayer meeting in Birla House at 5:09 
P.M. on 30 January, 1948. Gandhiji fell down on the spot 
and succumbed to his injuries within a few minutes. Godse 
voluntarily surrendered to the police and was taken in to 
custody. He was kept at Tughlaq Road police station fora 
few days. 

During investigation it was observed that Godse was 
not the only person concerned, in tnis murder. There was 
a deep conspiracy behind the murder. After five months 
the Police declared the case ripe for trial. | 


The trial began on 22 June, 1948 inside the Historie | 
Red Fort of Delhi, before Mr. Justice Atma Charan, a senior 
member of the judicial branch of the Indian Civil Service. | 
The court was open to the pubic. | 


The eight persons charged with murder, conspiracy to 
commit murder and offences punishable under the Arms | 


and Explosive Substances Act were: | 


1. Nathuram Godse, 37, Editor, ‘Hindu Rashtra’, Poona. | 
2. Gopal Godse, 27, Storekeeper, Army Depot, Poona. 
3. Narayan Apte,34,Managing Director, Hindu Rashiro 
Prakashan Ltd | 
‘4, Vishnu Karkare, 37, Restaurant Proprietor, Ahmad Nagar: | 
` 5. Madanlal Pahwa,20, Refugee Camp, Ahmad Nagar. 
6. Shankar Kistayya, 27, Domestic Servant, Poona. 


— 7 a 
* Source: ‘G.D.KHOSLA- THE MURDER OF THE MAHA 
And Other Cases From a Judge’s Notebook’- 1977, J 

PRESS PVT LTD. BOMBAY | 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri { 


from Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs zù 
7. Dattataraya Parchure, 49, Medical Practi oar ae 


8. Vinayak Savarkar, 65, Barrister-at-Law, Landlord and 
Property Owner, Bombay. 
The advocate General Mr. C.K. Daphtary opened the 
prosecution case on 24 June, 1948 and the examination of 
the witnesses began. 


Digambar Badge (pronounced Bahdgay), became the 
approver in this case. He was alleged to be co conspirator 
in the murder plan of Mahatma Gandhi. He was tendered 
conditional pardon. 


The examination of the witnesses concluded on 6 
November 1948. On 10 February, 1949, the trial court 
pronounced its judgment. Savarkar was acquitted. 
Nathuram Godse and Narayan Apte were sentenced to 
- death and the remaining five accused were awarded 
sentences of imprisonment for life. 


Four days after the judgment was passed, Godse 
appealed in the High Court claiming that there was no 
conspiracy and he was the only one responsible for the 
murder. The appeals for other accused persons were also 
filed in the High Court. 


Considering the importance of the case the Chief 
Justice appointed three judges instead of two for the appeal 
to be heard by the divisional bench. The judges were Mr. 
Justice Bhandari, Mr. Justice Achhruram and Mr. Justice 
G.D. Khosla.. 


Punjab High Court at Simla was hurriedly set up 
during the autumn of 1948 in a large memorial building 
called ‘Peterhoff which was the summer residence of the 
Viceroy. Admission to the court was regulated by the 
Passes issued by the Registrar for security reason and limit 
the number of persons. All the advocates who were not 
engaged in arguing their cases before other judges had 


CC-0. Nana ukh Library, BUP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


196 7 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 


of Simla occupied the chairs. There were separate Seatg 
for pressmen. On the right of the dais some seats were 
reserved for V.I.P’s who were the wives of Hon'ble Judges 
and high Government officials. In front of the dais, 
advocates representing the appellants were sitting. On the 
right hand end of the front row sat four lawyers for the 
prosecution. 

Nathuram Godse had declined to be represented by a 
lawyer and wished to argue his case himself as he could 
not afford the fee of an advocate. Though his request to 
argue on the basis of poverty appeared to be an excuse. 
His prayer was granted. He was standing in a specially 
constructed dock. The real reason was to show himself as 
a fearless patriot and a passionate protagonist of Hindu 
ideology. 


Brief introduction of the accused persons 


Nathuram was the son of a village postmaster. He 
had three brothers and two sisters and was the second 
child. At 22, he joined Rashtriya Swayam Sewak Sangh 
and Hindu Mahasabha. The aim of these organizations 
was to protect Hindu culture and solidarity. Later on, he 
started a newspaper ‘AGRANT’ and subsequently changed 
its name to ‘HINDU RASHTRA’. Godse had made a deep 
study of ‘Bhagavad-Gita’ and knew most of its verses by 


heart. He used to quote these verses to justify acts of 


violence to achieve a righteous aim. He had not married. 


Gopal Godse was the younger brother of Nethuram 
Godse. He was not as passionate about the Hindu causé 
as his brother. He had two daughters. He like Nathura™ 
was also a member of Hindu Mahasabha. He joined the 
army and was appointed a store keeper at. Kirkee nea! 
Poona. During the war he went to Irag and Iran. He was 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


From Justice G.D. Khosla‘s Memoirs | 3 197 


ee —————_ a es LO 
influenced by Savarkar’s views, which were against any | 
proposal to divide India. Nathuram Codse dissuaded him 
to join him, as he was a married man with responsibilities. 
Gopal Godse thought over the matter andin the endjoined | 
his brother. i 

Narayan Dattatraya Apte, a Brahmin, was B.Sc. 
and was a teacher at Ahmednagar School. He started a 
rifle club and joined Hindu Rashtra Dal. During this period 
he met Godse and became his friend. In 1943 he joined 
Indian Air Force and was awarded a king’s Commission. 
Four months later, he resigned from his job as his younger 
brother had died and he had to look after the family now. . 
Though he did not possess Godse’s religious fervor, yet he. 
got convinced that nothing could be achieved in politics 
through peaceful means. 

Vishnu Ramakrishnan Karkare’s parents were 
very poor and were unable to support him. They left him 
at an orphanage and abandoned him. He ran away. and 
supported himself by working in Hotels and restaurants 
and finally started his own restaurant in Ahmednagar. 
He became an active member of Hindu Mahasabha and 
was elected secretary of the district branch. There, he met 
Apte and the two became friends. He contested 
Ahmednagar Municipal Committee election and got 
elected. In 1946, he went to Noakhali with a relief party 
to assist the victims of Muslim population. He stayed there 
. for about three months. There he witnessed kidnappings . 
and raping of Hindu women. He was quite upset when 
Mahatma Gandhi said that he had not seen even 4 single - 
kidnapping or raping of Hindu women and awarded Rs. _ 
10000/- to a vicious criminal Ghulam Sarwar am M.LA., 
who was responsible for these crimes. eS 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


198 F _ Why! Assassinated Gandhi 


Sa a a 
Madanlal Pahwa, a refugee from Pakpattan (now in 
Pakistan) ran away from school. He went to Poona ang 
joined the Army. During training he asked for and wag 
given release orders. Large scale rioting had started, when 
' he reached home. His father and aunt were murdered. He 
was evacuated to Ferozepur. He came to Poona and came 
across Apte and Godse. He realized that the Government 
had no sympathy for Hindus who were victims of the 
partition and started organizing demonstrations by the 
group of refugees. 


Shanker Kistayya, an illiterate was the son of a 
‘village carpenter. He came to Poona in search of a job, 
where he met Badge, who dealt in daggers, knives and 
firearms and ammunition. Kistayya started working with 
him as a domestic servant at a salary of Rs.30/- per month. 
Kistayya apart from doing Badge’s housework used to 
wash his clothes, looked after his shop and drove his 
rickshaw. He was Badge’s trusted agent for carrying his 
contraband arms and weapons to his customers. Because 
of communal trouble in Hyderabad and other parts of the 
country, there was a great demand of such arms. 


Dr. Dattatraya Parchure, a Brahmin from Gwalior 
was a medical doctor and surgeon. He joined Medical 
Service but was dismissed in 1934. He began private 
practice and joined Hindu Mahasabha. He was elected 
Dictator of the local Hindu Rashtriya Sena. Because of 


his links with these organizations, he happened to meet 
Godse and Apte. 


Vinayak Savarkar or Veer Savarkar was ê 
barrister, poet, play write and historian. He was linked © 
revolutionaries and was sentenced to imprisonment for 
fourteen years at cellular Jail in Andaman and Nicobar 
islands. After his release in 1937, he joined Hindu 

CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


from Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs ` 19 


sip ey SE eT 
Mahasabha and devoted himself in its objective for United 
India. For many years he remained its President. 
Digambar Ramchandra Badge, the approver from 
Challisgaon in East Khandesh was a school dropout came 
to Poona to earn his livelihood. There he started buying 
knives, daggers and knuckle dusters from a shop and 
hawked them. After coming in contact with some Hindu 
Mahasabha activists, he started selling books, knives, 
daggers and knuckle dusters at the stall taken in the Hindu 
Mahasabha’s annual sessions, wherever these were held. 
He met Godse and Apte at Veer Savarkar’s house, who 
was the President of Hindu Mahasabha. i 


This group of people became united by a common cause 
which was hatred for Mahatma Gandhi. They learnt that 
Mahatma Gandhi had started his fast to compel the 
Government to pay Rupees fifty five crore to Pakistan. 
After three days the Government surrendered to Mahatma 
Gandhi’s demand. It was too much for them to bear this 
blackmail of Mahatma Gandhi. They felt till Mahatma 
Gandhi was alive he would not let the government take 
any decision independently. On 13 January Godse and 
Apte hatched a plan to get rid of Gandhiji. The execution 
of this plan needed forethought team work. The first thing 
Godse did was to make an assignment of bis assets. There . 
were two persons who were closer to him; one was Apte, ` 
his friend and business associate and the other one was 
his younger brother Gopal. They had risked their lives on 
his bidding. He considered doing whatever was possible 
for him to do for their families. He was holding two 
insurance: policies of Rs. 2000/- and Rs.3000/-each. He 
nominated their wives as the beneficiaries. : 

To execute the plan, Godse and Apte came to Delhi by 
plane on 17 January and stayed at Marina Hotel till 20 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


200 #7 Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
January. Badge and Shankar came to Delhi on 19 Ja 
and stayed at Hindu Mahasabha Bhawan. Pahw 
Karkare had already come on 17 January and were Staying 
at a hotel in Chandni Chowk. On the 20' Morning, Apte, 
Karkare, Badge and Shankar visited Birla House at 
Albuquerque Road, now known as Tees J anuary Marg 
where prayers meetings of Mahatma Gandhi were held, 
It was decided that next day Pahwa would explode the 
gun cotton slab near the back door and they expected a 
stampede to follow after the explosion. In the ensuing 
confusion Badge and his servant Shankar would fire at 
Gandhiji from front and back and each would throw a hand 
grenade. Gopal Godse, Pahwa and Karkare would also 
throw hand grenades. Thereafter everyone would escape. 


nuary 
a and 


Next day during the prayer speech, Pahwa exploded 
the guncotton slab near the back door. No stampede 
occurred, as Gandhiji thought that it was a military 
practice and asked the audience to calm down and be 


seated. Pahwa was apprehended and their whole plan got 
foiled. 


All of them went back and met at Thane, a suburb of 
Bombay. Nathuram mentioned several instances from 
history and emphasized that a single person’s act had 
better chance to succeed, He took the responsibility to 
assassinate Gandhiji single handedly. 


On 29 January Godse, Apte and Karkare came to 
Delhi. On 30 January at 4:30 P.M. Godse hired a tonga 
for Birla House. The other two also followed him. At Birla 
House about 200 persons had gathered to listen to 
Gandhiji. Gandhiji as usual was coming up slowly with 
his hands resting on the shoulders of two girls. As he raised 
his hands to join them in the customary greeting, Godse 
took a quick step forward, pushed aside the girl and fired 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


From Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs “3201 


three shots in quick succession. Mahatma Gandhi collapsed 

and fell down saying ‘ah’ and died within twenty minutes. 

Godse made no attempt to escape and was caught 

jmmediately by a police officer. Apte and Karkare came | 
out and returned to Bombay. 


The whole country was investigated and the arrests 
followed very quickly. Badge was arrested on 31 January, 
Gopal Godse on 5 February and Dr. Parchure from Gwalior 

on the same day as Gopal Godse. Shankar was arrested 
on 6 February, Apte and Karkare on 14 February, 1948. 


At the trial, Godse admitted his crime, but maintained 
that it was only he who was responsible for Gandhiji’s 
murder and no one else was involved in any conspiracy. 

- He admitted that he and Apte had travelled to Delhi by 
air on 17 January and stayed at Hotel Marina and he 
again came on 27 January. He also admitted having visited 
Dr. Parchure at Gwalior. Apte too admitted that he had 
travelled with Nathuram Godse to Delhi at both the 
occasions as well as to Gwalior. Karkare too admitted 
coming to Delhi on 17 January and staying at Hotel Sharif. 
He denied his role in the conspiracy. Shankar pleaded to 
the trial court that he had carried out his master’s orders 
and was ignorant of any conspiracy. Gopal Godse totally 
denied the charges that he had gone to Delhi on 18 January 

and was present there up to 20 January. Madanlal Pahwa 
admitted to his crime but asserted that the act of exploding 
the gun —cotton slab was to show his resentment of the 
refugees like himself. He had exploded it at a safe distance 
from everyone so that no harm is caused by the explosion 
to anyone. 

Judges gave Dr. Parch 

doubt accepting their appe 

and sentence of the remaining ap 


ure and Shankar the benefit of. 
al for acquittal. The conviction 
pellants were confirmed. 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


E Why I Assassinated Gandhi 


~ Justice G.D. Khosla one of the Judges on the bench of 
Punjab High Court in his book ‘Murder Of The Mahatma’ 
says: ‘The highlight of the appeal before us, was the 
discourse delivered by Nathuram Godse in his defence. 
He spoke for several hours, discussing in the first instance, 
the facts of the case and then the motives which prompted 
him to take Mahatma Gandhi's life. Following passages 
taken from this statement will give some indication of his 
opinion and attitudes.’ 


“Born in a devotional Brahmin family, I instinctively 
came to revere Hindu Religion, its History and Hindu 
culture. I had been intensely proud of Hindudom as a 
whole. Nevertheless, as I grew up, I developed a tendency 
to free thinking unfettered by any superstitious allegiance 
to any ‘ism’, political or religious. That is why I worked 
actively for the eradication of untouchability and caste 
system based on birth alone. I publically joined anti-caste 
movements and maintained that all Hindus should be 
treated with equal status as to rights, social and religious, 
and should be high or low on their merit alone. I used to 
take part in organized anti-caste dinners in which 
thousands of Hindus-Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, 
Chamars and Bhangis broke the caste rules and dined in 
the company of each other.’ Thereafter he explained how 
Muslim atrocities perpetrated on the Hindus under the 
patronage of Suhrawardy in Noakhali. .... ‘Gandhiji 
started calling him Shahid Saheb- a martyr soul even in 
his prayer meetings. ..... Not only that, Mahatma Gandhi 
in his prayer meetings in temple in Bhangi colony started 
reading Quran in spite of protests by the Hindu 
Worshippers there. Of course he dared not read Geeta in a 
Mosque. On 15 August Punjab was set in flames by the 
Muslims, The Hindu Mahasabha on my insistence decided 


to boycott the festiviti t 
estivities a 5 rnmen 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh es and the Congres Bi Gover 


From Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs Œ 203 


lll Lt tite 
and to launch a fighting programme to check the Muslim 
onslaught. Gandhiji in fact succeeded in doing what the 
British had always wanted I, do in pursuance of their 
policy of ‘Divide and Rule’. He helped them in dividing 
India and it is not yet certain whether their rule has ceased. 

The accumulating provocation of 32 years, culminating 
in his last pro- Muslim fast, at last, goaded me to the 
conclusion that the existence of Gandhiji should be brought 
to an end immediately. 


On coming back to India he developed a subjective 
mentality under which he alone was to be the final judge 
of what was right or wrong....either the Congress had to 
surrender its will to his, and had to be content with playing 
the second fiddle to all his eccentricity, whimsically, 
metaphysics and primitive vision. Many people thought 
his politics were irrational, but they had either to withdraw 
from the Congress or to place their intelligence at his feet 
to do what he liked with it. In such irresponsibility Gandhiji 
was guilty of blunder after blunder, failure after failure 
and disaster after disaster. No one single political victory 
can be claimed to his credit during 33 years of his political 
predominance. 


So long as Gandhian method was in the ascendance, 
frustration was the only inevitable result....As regards 
non violence, it was absurd to expect 40 crores of people to 
regulate their lives on such lofty plane and it broke down 
most conspicuously in 1942. As regards truth, the least I 
can say is that the truthfulness of the average CORE IE 
is by no means of a higher order than that ofamanin the 
street, and that very often it is untruth, masked by a in 
veneer of pretended truthfulness. 


Gandhiji’s inner voice, his spiritual power ane 


; : ae h is made of, all 
doctring of, BoM KiPleRce Gf whe Roane eGangotri 


204 FF Why I Assassinated Gandhi 
crumbled before Mr. Jinnah‘s iron will and proved to be 
- powerless. Having known that with his spiritual powers he 
could not influence Mr. Jinnah, Gandhiji should have either 
changed his policy or could have admitted his defeat and 
given way to others of different views to deal with Mr. 
‘Jinnah and his Muslim League. But Gandhiji was not 
honest enough to do that. He could not forget his egoism or 
self even for the practical policies; while the great blunders- 
blunders as big as Himalayas were being committed. 


Briefly speaking, I thought to myself and foresaw that 
I shall be totally ruined and the only thing that I could 
expect from the people would be nothing but hatred and 
that I shall have lost my honour, even more valuable than 
my life, if I were to kill” 

Nathu Ram Godse requested the Honourable Court 
not to show any mercy to him or any one on his behalf 
should beg for mercy towards him and may pass orders of 

` sentence as may be proper. He professed that honest 


writers of history would weigh his act and find the true 
value thereof on some day in future. 


. He ended his narration on a high note of emotional 
_Yeciting verses from Bhagwadgita and the slogan — 


. AKHAND BHARAT AMAR RAHE-VANDE MATARAM. 


Mr. Justice Khosla writes in his memoirs— “The 
audience was visibly and audibly moved. There was a deep 
silence when he ceased speaking. Many women were in tears 
and men were coughing and searching for their 
handkerchiefs. The silence was accentuated and made 
deeper by the sound of occasional subdued sniff or a muffed 
cough. It seemed to me that I was taking part in some kind 
of melodrama or in a scene out of a Hollywood feature film. 

Thave however no doubt that had the audience of that 


"day been constituted into a jury and entrusted with the 
CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


` ground where the pyres had been erected was 


From Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs 205 


nom S O 
task of deciding Godse’s appeal, they would have brought 
in a verdict of ‘not guilty,’ by an over whelming majority” 

The final chapter of this sad story takes us to the 
Central Gaol, Ambala where Nathuram Godse and Apte 
were executed on the morning of November 15 , 1949.The 
two condemned prisoners were led out of their cells with 
their hands pinioned behind them. Godse walked in front. 
His step occasionally faltered. His demeanour and general 
appearance evidenced a state of nervousness and fear. He 
tried to fight against it and keep up a bold exterior by 
shouting every few seconds the slogan ‘Akhand Bharat’ 
(undivided India)....... The desperate cry was taken up by 
Apte, who shouted ‘Amar Rahe’ (may stay for ever). His 
loud and firm tone made an uncanny contrast to Godse’s 
at times almost feeble utterance... A single gallows had 
been prepared for the execution of both. Two ropes, each 
with a noose, hung from the high crossbar in parallel lines. 
Godse and Apte were made to stand side by side, the black 
cloth bags were drawn over their heads and tied at the 
necks. After adjusting the nooses, the executioner stepped 
off the platform and pulled the lever. 

... The dead bodies were cremated inside the gaol, the 
ploughed 
up and the earth and ashes taken to the Ghaggar river 
and secretly submerged at a secluded spot.” 


Justice G.D. Khosla was one of the three judges on the bench 


of Punjab High Court passing judgment on the persons inv 
in the case. Some of his narrative thought is a repeat w a 
Gopal Godse has already described. Yet for the sake of continuity 


it could not be avoided.Œditor) 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


a Why | Assassinated Gandhi 
a aaa a 


SR 
Narayan Apte 


_ 


SS 


Veer Savarkar 


Gopal Godse 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


From Justice G.D. Khosla’s Memoirs = 207 
— aaa 


a 


Snankar Kistaya 


Digambar Badge 


— eee 


Madanlal Pahwa 


CC-0. Nanaji Deshmukh Library, BJP, Jammu. Digitized by eGangotri 


i we ae ie Tenited nao Genser ccescenee team 125.00 
_ Hansraj Rahbar 


2. Vivekananda : The Warrior Saint ................... 145.00 
(Also translate in Hindi, Spanish & 
Punjabi-Sold many edition) 
= Hansraj Rahbar 
3. An Encyclopaedic Study of... 150.00 


Marxist Philosophy 
M. Shirokov 


4. Inspirational Thoughts & Incidents.................. 100.00 
Vivekananda . 


an 


> Patanjali Yoga SUtTASS .... 100.00 
Vivekananda 


2 Tate ore oie ap reer eh 100.00 
fo. aa sce 100.00 


CC-0. NanajrD o p_jammu, Digitized by eGangotri 


= ASSASSINATED? 
GANDHI 
 NATHURAM GODSE 


Nathuram Godse requested the Hon’ble Court not to show any 
mercy to him to or any one, on his behalf, should beg for mercy 
towards him and the Hon’ble Court may pass orders of Sentence 4s 
may be proper. He professed that honest writers of history would 
weighs his act and find the true value thereof on some day in 
future. A ii 
He ended his narration on a high note of emotional reciting 
verses from Bhagwad Gita and the slogan :- 
Akhand Bharat Amar Rahe- Vande Mataram. 


Mr. Justice Khosla - Writes in his memoirs “The audience was 
visibly and audibly moved. There was a deep silence when he, 
ceased speaking. Many women wre in tears and men were 
coughing and searching for their handkerchiefs. The silence was 
accentuated and made deeper by the sound of occasional subduced 
sniff or a muffed cough. It seemed to me that was taking part in 
some kind of melodrama or in a scene out of a Hollywood feature 
film. I have however no doubt tha thad the audience of that day 
been constitued into a jury and entrusted with the task of deciding 
Godse’s appear. They would have brought in a veredict of 
‘Not Guilty’ by.an overwhelming majority” 


| 


97978 


2=X 


4 


Lil 


‘Farsight Publishers and Distributors 


S-16, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110032 
iA Ph.: 011-22324833, 09810461412 
E-mail : goelbooks@rediffmail.com 