PSYCHOLOGY 


“a successor to Freud.” Psychosomatic Medicine 


é 
sper 


4 
| 
| 
| 


lege wan 


pues - ONINVA HOS HOUVSS SNYA 


aad 


“...the most important contribution 
to psychiatry since the writings 
of Freud...” —Los Angeles Times 


MAN'S 
SEARCH 
FOR 
MEANING 


AN INTRODUCTION TO 
LOGOTHERAPY 


VIKTOR E. FRANKL, 


President of the Austrian Medical Society for 
Psychotherapy, has developed revolutionary con- 
cepts that add a new dimension to the theories of 
Freud and Adler and extend the basic concepts of 
modern psychology. In this book he describes his 
harrowing years in Nazi prison camps, during which he 
developed Logotherapy, and the crystallization of his 
theories as a result of those hellish experiences. 


DR. VIKTOR E. FRANKL, the author, is Europe’s 
leading psychiatrist. His new theory, logotherapy, 
has rocketed him to fame as the leader of the Third 
Viennese School of Psychotherapy and the most sig- 
nificant modern thinker in the field. Since 1961, when 
he was visiting professor at Harvard University’s 
summer school, Dr. Frankl has been a frequent lec- 
turer in this country. Each time he returns, the 
number of requests for his lectures and appearances 
grows by leaps and bounds. The impact of logother- 
apy is sweeping the campuses. A deeply moving 
experience awaits every reader of this historic work 
that is changing the whole course of psychology. 


THE EXPERTS AGREE 


“Lucid and provocative ... successor 
to Freud...” 
—Psychosomatic Medici 


“Outspoken... fascinating ... prescribed for 
everyone who would understand our time.” 
—Journal of Individual Psychology 


“Undeniable literary value .. .”’ 
—American Journal of Psychiatry 


MAN’S SEARCH 

FOR MEANING 

is a revised and enlarged version 

of a previous book entitled 

From Death-Camp to Existentialism, which was 
selected as “Book of the Year” in 1961-62 by 
Colby College. 


Both editions were originally published by 
Beacon Press. 


Washington Square Press editions 
by Viktor E. Frankl 


Hardcover 


PSYCHOTHERAPY AND EXISTENTIALISM: 
Selected Papers on Logotherapy 


Paperback 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
An Introduction to Logotherapy 


MANES 
SEARCH 
FOR 
MEANING: 


AN INTRODUCTION TO 
LOGOTHERAPY 

BY 

VIKTOR E. FRANKL 


Part One translated by 
ILSE LASCH 


Preface by 
GORDON W. ALLPORT 


This edition has been 
newly revised and enlarged 
by the author. 


Original title: 
FROM DEATH-CAMP TO EXISTENTIALISM 


WwspP 
v7 


WASHINGTON SQUARE +r RESS NEW YORK 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING: 
An Introduction to Logotherapy 


A Washington Square Press edition 
Ist printing February, 1963 
JOC. PRintiNiGi s<é<sase seas acuaeees October, 1969 


A new edition of a distinguished 
work now made available in an 
inexpensive, well-designed format 


WSP 


L 
Published by Washington Square Press, 


a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc., 630 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
A A ET A ES EET 
WASHINGTON Square Press editions are distributed in the 
U.S. by Simon & Schuster, Inc., 630 Fifth Avenue, New 
York, N.Y. 10020 and in Canada by Simon & Schuster 
of Canada, Ltd., Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada. 


Standard Book Numbers: 671-47152-X. 
Copyright, ©, 1959, 1963, by Viktor E. Frankl. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the U.S.A. 


To the memory of my mother 


Contents 


Preface ix 
PART ONE: 
Experiences in a Concentration Camp 3 
PART TWO: 
Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 149 


Bibliography 215 


Preface 


Dr. FRANKL, author-psychiatrist, sometimes 
asks his patients who suffer from a multitude 
of torments great and small, “Why do you not 
commit suicide?” From their answers he can 
often find the guide-line for his psychothera- 
py: in one life there is love for one’s children 
to tie to; in another life, a talent to be used; in 
a third, perhaps only lingering memories worth 
preserving. To weave these slender threads of 
a broken life into a firm pattern of meaning 
and responsibility is the object and challenge 
of logotherapy, which is Dr. Frankl’s own ver- 
sion of modern existential analysis. 

In this book, Dr. Frankl explains the experi- 
ence which led to the discovery of logothera- 
py. As a longtime prisoner in bestial concen- 
tration camps he found himself stripped to 
naked existence. His father, mother, brother, 


1X 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


and his wife died in camps or were sent to the 
gas ovens, so that, excepting for his sister, his 
entire family perished in these camps. How 
could he-—every possession lost, every value 
destroyed, suffering from hunger, cold and 
brutality, hourly expecting extermination— 
how could he find life worth preserving? A 
psychiatrist who personally has faced such ex- 
tremity is a psychiatrist worth listening to. He, 
if anyone, should be able to view our human 
condition wisely and with compassion. Dr. 
Frankl’s words have a profoundly honest ring, 
for they rest on experiences too deep for de- 
ception. What he has to say gains in prestige 
because of his present position on the Medical 
Faculty of the University of Vienna and be- 
cause of the renown of the logotherapy clinics 
that today are springing up in many lands, 
patterned on his own famous Neurological 
Poliklinik in Vienna. 

One cannot help but compare Viktor 
Frankl’s approach to theory and therapy with 
the work of his predecessor, Sigmund Freud. 
Both physicians concern themselves primarily 
with the nature and cure of neuroses. Freud 


x 


Preface 


finds the root of these distressing disorders in 
the anxiety caused by conflicting and uncon- 
scious motives. Frankl distinguishes several 
forms of neurosis, and traces some of them 
(the nodgenic neuroses) to the failure of the 
sufferer to find meaning and a sense of respon- 
sibility in his existence. Freud stresses frustra- 
tion in the sexual life; Frankl, frustration in the 
will-to-meaning. In Europe today there is a 
marked turning away from Freud and a wide- 
spread embracing of existential analysis, which 
takes several related forms-—the school of logo- 
therapy being one. It is characteristic of 
Frankl’s tolerant outlook that he does not re- 
pudiate Freud, but builds gladly on his con- 
tributions; nor does he quarrel with other 
forms of existential therapy, but welcomes 
kinship with them. 

The present narrative, brief though it is, is 
artfully constructed and gripping. On two 
occasions I have read it through at a single sit- 
ting, unable to break away from its spell. 
Somewhere beyond the midpoint of the story 
Dr. Frankl introduces his own philosophy of 
logotherapy. He introduces it so gently into 


XI 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


the continuing narrative that only after finish- 
ing the book does the reader realize that here 
is an essay of profound depth, and not just 
one more brutal tale of concentration camps. 

From this autobiographical fragment the 
reader learns much. He learns what a human 
being does when he suddenly realizes he has 
“nothing to lose except his so ridiculously 
naked life.” Frankl’s description of the mixed 
flow of emotion and apathy is arresting. First 
to the rescue comes a cold detached curiosity 
concerning one’s fate. Swiftly, too, come 
strategies to preserve the remnants of one’s 
life, though the chances of surviving are slight. 
Hunger, humiliation, fear and deep anger at 
mjustice are rendered tolerable by closely 
guarded images of beloved persons, by religion, 
by a grim sense of humor, and even by 
glimpses of the healing beauties of nature-a 
tree or a sunset. 

But these moments of comfort do not es- 
tablish the will to live unless they help the 
prisoner make larger sense out of his appar- 
ently senseless suffering. It is here that we 
encounter the central theme of existentialism: 


X11 


Preface 


to live is to suffer, to survive is to find meaning 
in the suffering. If there is a purpose in life at 
all, there must be a purpose in suffering and 
in dying. But no man can tell another what 
this purpose is. Each must find out for himself, 
and must accept the responsibility that his an- 
swer prescribes. If he succeeds he will continue 
to grow in spite of all indignities. Frankl is 
fond of quoting Nietzsche, “He who has a 
why to live can bear with almost any how.” 

In the concentration camp every circum- 
stance conspires to make the prisoner lose his 
hold. All the familiar goals in life are snatched 
away. What alone remains is “the last of hu- 
man freedoms”—the ability to “choose one’s 
attitude in a given set of circumstances.” This 
ultimate freedom, recognized by the ancient 
Stoics as well as by modern existentialists, 
takes on vivid significance in Frankl’s story. 
The prisoners were only average men, but 
some, at least, by choosing to be “worthy of 
their suffering” proved man’s capacity to rise 
above his outward fate. 

As a psychotherapist, the author, of course, 
wants to know how men can be helped to 


Xili 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


achieve this distinctively human capacity. How 
can one awaken in a patient the feeling that 
he is responsible to life for something, how- 
ever grim his circumstances may be? Frankl 
gives us a moving account of one collective 
therapeutic session he held with his fellow 
prisoners. 

At the publisher’s request Dr. Frankl has 
added to his autobiography a brief but explicit 
statement of the basic tenets of logotherapy 
as well as a bibliography. Up to now most 
of the publications of this “Third Viennese 
School of Psychotherapy” (the predecessors 
being the Freudian and Adlerian Schools) 
have been chiefly in German. The reader will 
therefore welcome Dr. Frankl’s supplement 
to his personal narrative. 

Unlike many European existentialists, Frankl 
is neither pessimistic nor antireligious. On the 
contrary, for a writer who faces fully the 
ubiquity of suffering and the forces of evil, 
he takes a surprisingly hopeful view of man’s 
capacity to transcend his predicament and dis- 
cover an adequate guiding truth. 

J recommend this little book heartily, for it 


XIV 


Preface 


is a gem of dramatic narrative, focused upon 
the deepest of human problems. It has literary 
and philosophical merit and provides a com- 
pelling introduction to the most significant 
psychological movement of our day. 

—Gorpon W. ALLPoRT 


Gordon W. Allport, a professor of psychol- 
ogy at Harvard University, is one of the fore- 
most writers and teachers in the field in this 
hemisphere. He has published numerous orig- 
inal works on psychology and was the editor of 
the Journal of Abnormal and Social Psycholo- 
gy. It is chiefly through the pioneering work 
of Professor Allport that Dr. Frankl’s mo- 
mentous theory was introduced to this coun- 
try; moreover, it is in part to his credit that 
the interest shown here in logotherapy is 


growing by leaps and bounds. 


Part One 


Experiences in 


a Concentration Cam /p 


‘THIs BOOK DOES NOT claim to be an account of 
facts and events but of personal experiences, 
experiences which millions of prisoners have 
suffered time and again. It is the inside story of 
a concentration camp, told by one of its sur- 
vivors. [his tale is not concerned with the 
great horrors, which have already been de- 
scribed often enough (though less often be- 
lieved), but with the multitude of small tor- 
ments. In other words, it will try to answer 
this question: How was everyday life in a con- 
centration camp reflected in the mind of the 
average prisoner? 

Most of the events described here did not 
take place in the large and famous camps, but 
in the small ones where most of the real ex- 
termination took place. This story is not about 
the suffering and death of great heroes and 


3 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
martyrs, nor is it about the prominent Capos— 
prisoners who acted as trustees, having special 
privileges—or well-known prisoners. Thus it is 
not so much concerned with the sufferings 
of the mighty, but with the sacrifices, the cru- 
cifixion and the deaths of the great army of 
unknown and unrecorded victims. It was these 
common prisoners, who bore no distinguishing 
marks on their sleeves, whom the Capos really 
despised. While these ordinary prisoners had 
little or nothing to eat, the Capos were never 
hungry; in fact many of the Capos fared better 
in the camp than they had in their entire lives. 
Often they were harder on the prisoners than 
were the guards, and beat them more cruelly 
than the SS men did. These Capos, of course, 
were chosen only from those prisoners whose 
characters promised to make them suitable for 
such procedures, and if they did not comply 
with what was expected of them, they were 
immediately demoted. They soon became 
much like the SS men and the camp wardens 
and may be judged on a similar psychological 
basis. 


4 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


It is easy for the outsider to get the wrong 
conception of camp life, a conception mingled 
with sentiment and pity. Little does he know 
of the hard fight for existence which raged 
among the prisoners. This was an unrelenting 
struggle for daily bread and for life itself, for 
one’s own sake or for that of a good friend. 


Let us take the case of a transport which 
was officially announced to transfer a certain 
number of prisoners to another camp; but it 
was a fairly safe guess that its final destination 
would be the gas chambers. A selection of sick 
or feeble prisoners incapable of work would 
be sent to one of the big central camps which 
were fitted with gas chambers and crema- 
toriums. The selection process was the signal 
for a free fight among all the prisoners, or of 
group against group. All that mattered was 
that one’s own name and that of one’s friend 
were crossed off the list of victims, though 
everyone knew that for each man saved an- 
other victim had to be found. 


A definite number of prisoners had to go 
5 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


with each transport. It did not really matter 
which, since each of them was nothing but a 
number. On their admission to the camp (at 
least this was the method in Auschwitz) all 
their documents had been taken from them, to- 
gether with their other possessions. Each pris- 
oner, therefore, had had an opportunity to 
claim a fictitious name or profession; and for 
various reasons many did this. The authorities 
were interested only in the captives’ numbers. 
These numbers were often tattooed on their 
skin, and also had to be sewn to a certain spot 
on the trousers, jacket, or coat. Any guard who 
wanted to make a charge against a prisoner 
just glanced at his number (and how we 
dreaded such glances! ); he never asked for his 
name. 

To return to the convoy about to depart. 
There was neither time nor desire to consider 
moral or ethical issues. Every man was con- 
trolled by one thought only: to keep himself 


alive for the family waiting for him at home, 
and to save his friends. With no hesitation, 
therefore, he would arrange for another 


6 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


prisoner, another “number,” to take his place 
in the transport. 

As | have already mentioned, the process of 
selecting Capos was a negative one; only the 
most brutal of the prisoners were chosen for 
this job (although there were some happy ex- 
ceptions). But apart from the selection of 
Capos which was undertaken by the SS, there 
was a sort of self-selecting process going on 
the whole time among all of the prisoners. On 
the average, only those prisoners could keep 
alive who, after years of trekking from camp 
to camp, had lost all scruples in their fight for 
existence; they were prepared to use every 
means, honest and otherwise, even brutal 
force, theft, and betrayal of their friends, in 
order to save themselves. We who have come 
back, by the aid of many lucky chances or 
miracles—whatever one may choose to call 
them—we know: the best of us did not return. 


Many factual accounts about concentration 
camps are already on record. Here, facts will 
be significant only as far as they are part of a 
man’s experiences. It is the exact nature of 


7 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


these experiences that the following essay will 
attempt to describe. For those who have been 
inmates in a camp, it will attempt to explain 
their experiences in the light of present-day 
knowledge. And for those who have never 
been inside, it may help them to comprehend, 
and above all to understand, the experiences of 
that only too small percentage of prisoners 
who survived and who now find life very diffi- 
cult. These former prisoners often say, “We 
dislike talking about our experiences. No ex- 
planations are needed for those who have been 
inside, and the others will understand neither 
how we felt then nor how we feel now.” 

To attempt a methodical presentation of the 
subject is very difficult, as psychology requires 
a certain scientific detachment. But does a man 
who makes his observations while he himself is 
a prisoner possess the necessary detachment? 
Such detachment is granted to the outsider, 
but he is too far removed to make any state- 
ments of real value. Only the man inside 
knows. His judgments may not be objective; 
his evaluations may be out of proportion. This 


is inevitable. An attempt must be made to 
8 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


avoid any personal bias, and that is the real 
difficulty of a book of this kind. At times it 
will be necessary to have the courage to tell of 
very intimate experiences. I had intended to 
write this book anonymously, using my prison 
number only. But when the manuscript was 
completed, I saw that as an anonymous publi- 
cation it would lose half its value, and that I 
must have the courage to state my convictions 
openly. I therefore refrained from deleting 
any of the passages, in spite of an intense dis- 
like of exhibitionism. 

I shall leave it to others to distill the contents 
of this book into dry theories. These might be- 
come a contribution to the psychology of 
prison life, which was investigated after the 
First World War, and which acquainted us 
with the syndrome of “barbed wire sickness.” 
We are indebted to the Second World War 
for enriching our knowledge of the “psycho- 
pathology of the masses” (if I may quote a 
variation of the well-known phrase and title 
of a book by LeBon), for the war gave us the 
war of nerves and it gave us the concentra- 


tion camp. 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


As this story is about my experiences as an 
ordinary prisoner, it is important that I men- 
tion, not without pride, that I was not em- 
ployed as a psychiatrist in camp, or even as a 
doctor, except for the last few weeks. A few 
of my colleagues were lucky enough to be 
employed in poorly heated first-aid posts ap- 
plying bandages made of scraps of waste pa- 
per. But I was Number 119,104, and most of 
the time I was digging and laying tracks for 
railway lines. At one time, my job was to dig 
a tunnel, without help, for a water main un- 
der a road. This feat did not go unrewarded, 
just before Christmas, 1944, I was presented 
with a gift of so-called “premium coupons.” 
These were issued by the construction firm to 
which we were practically sold as slaves: the 
firm paid the camp authorities a fixed price per 
day, per prisoner. The coupons cost the firm 
fifty pfennigs each and could be exchanged for 
six cigarettes, often weeks later, although they 
sometimes lost their validity. I became the 
proud owner of a token worth twelve ciga- 
rettes. But more important, the cigarettes 
could be exchanged for twelve soups, and 


10 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


twelve soups were often a very real respite 
from starvation. 

The privilege of actually smoking cigarettes 
was reserved for the Capo, who had his as- 
sured quota of weekly coupons; or possibly 
for a prisoner who worked as a foreman in a 
warehouse or workshop and received a few 
cigarettes in exchange for doing dangerous 
jobs. The only exceptions to this were those 
who had lost the will to live and wanted to 
“enjoy” their last days. Thus, when we saw a 
comrade smoking his own cigarettes, we knew 
he had given up faith in his strength to carry 
on, and, once lost, the will to live seldom re- 
turned. 


When one examines the vast amount of ma- 
terial which has been amassed as the result of 
many prisoners’ observations and experiences, 
three phases of the inmate’s mental reactions 
to camp life become apparent: the period fol- 
lowing his admission; the period when he is 
well entrenched in camp routine; and the pe- 
riod following his release and liberation. 

The symptom that characterizes the first 


11 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


phase is shock. Under certain conditions shock 
may even precede the prisoner’s formal ad- 
mission to the camp. I shall give as an example 
the circumstances of my own admission. 
Fifteen hundred persons had been traveling 
by train for several days and nights: there 
were eighty people in each coach. All had to 
lie on top of their luggage, the few remnants 
of their personal possessions. The carriages 
were so full that only the top parts of the win- 
dows were free to let in the gray of dawn. 
Everyone expected the train to head for some 
munitions factory, in which we would be em- 
ployed as forced labor. We did not know 
whether we were still in Silesia or already in 
Poland. The engine’s whistle had an uncanny 
sound, like a cry for help sent out in commis- 
eration for the unhappy load which it was 
destined to lead into perdition. Then the train 
shunted, obviously nearing a main station. 
Suddenly a cry broke from the ranks of the 
anxious passengers, “There is a sign, Ausch- 
witz!” Everyone’s heart missed a beat at that 
moment. Auschwitz—the very name stood for 
all that was horrible: gas chambers, crema- 


12 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


toriums, massacres. Slowly, almost hesitating- 
ly, the train moved on as if it wanted to spare 
its passengers the dreadful realization as long 
as possible: Auschwitz! 

With the progressive dawn, the outlines of 
an immense camp became visible: long 
stretches of several rows of barbed wire 
fences; watch towers; search lights; and long 
columns of ragged human figures, gray in the 
grayness of dawn, trekking along the straight 
desolate roads, to what destination we did not 
know. There were isolated shouts and whistles 
of command. We did not know their mean- 
ing. My imagination led me to see gallows 
with people dangling on them. I was horri- 
fied, but this was just as well, because step by 
step we had to become accustomed to a ter- 
rible and immense horror. 

Eventually we moved into the station. The 
initial silence was interrupted by shouted com- 
mands. We were to hear those rough, shrill 
tones from then on, over and over again in all 
the camps. Their sound was almost like the last 
cry of a victim, and yet there was a difference. 


It had a rasping hoarseness, as if it came from 
13 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


the throat of a man who had to keep shouting 
like that, a man who was being murdered 
again and again. fhe carriage doors were flung 
open and a small detachment of prisoners 
stormed inside. They wore striped uniforms, 
their heads were shaved, but they looked well 
fed. They spoke in every possible European 
tongue, and all with a certain amount of hu- 
mor, which sounded grotesque under the cir- 
cumstances. Like a drowning man clutching a 
straw, my inborn optimism (which has often 
controlled my feelings even in the most des- 
perate situations) clung to this thought: These 
prisoners look quite well, they seem to be in 
good spirits and even laugh. Who knows? I 
might manage to share their favorable position. 

In psychiatry there is a certain condition 
known as “delusion of reprieve.” The con- 
demned man, immediately before his execu- 
tion, gets the illusion that he might be re- 
prieved at the very last moment. We, too, 
clung to shreds of hope and believed to the 
last moment that it would not be so bad. Just 
the sight of the red cheeks and round faces of 
those prisoners was a great encouragement. 


14 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


Little did we know then that they formed a 
specially chosen elite, who for years had been 
the receiving squad for new transports as they 
rolled into the station day after day. They took 
charge of the new arrivals and their luggage, 
including scarce items and smuggled jewelry. 
Auschwitz must have been a strange spot in 
this Europe of the last years of the war. There 
must have been unique treasures of gold and 
silver, platinum and diamonds, not only in the 
huge storehouses but also in the hands of the 
SS. 

Fifteen hundred captives were cooped up in 
a shed built to accommodate probably two 
hundred at the most. We were cold and hun- 
gry and there was not enough room for every- 
one to squat on the bare ground, let alone to 
lie down. One five-ounce piece of bread was 
our only food in four days. Yet I heard the 
senior prisoners in charge of the shed bargain 
with one member of the receiving party about 
a tie-pin made of platinum and diamonds. Most 
of the profits would eventually be traded for 
liquor—schnapps. I do not remember any more 
just how many thousands of marks were need- 


15 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


ed to purchase the quantity of schnapps 
required for a “gay evening,” but I do 
know that those long-term prisoners needed 
schnapps. Under such conditions, who could 
blame them for trying to dope themselves? 
There was another group of prisoners who got 
liquor supplied in almost unlimited quantities 
by the SS: these were the men who were em- 
ployed in the gas chambers and crematoriums, 
and who knew very well that one day they 
would be relieved by a new shift of men, and 
that they would have to leave their enforced 
role of executioner and become victims them- 
selves. 

Nearly everyone in our transport lived un- 
der the illusion that he would be reprieved, 
that everything would yet be well. We did not 
realize the meaning behind the scene that was 
to follow presently. We were told to leave our 
luggage in the train and to fall into two lines— 
women on one side, men on the other—in 
order to file past a senior SS officer. Surpris- 
ingly enough, I had the courage to hide my 
haversack under my coat. My line filed past 
the officer, man by man. I realized that it 


16 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


would be dangerous if the officer spotted my 
bag. He would at least knock me down; I 
knew that from previous experience. Instinc- 
tively, I straightened on approaching the offi- 
cer, so that he would not notice my heavy 
load. Then I was face to face with him. He 
was a tall man who looked slim and fit in his 
spotless uniform. What a contrast to us, who 
were untidy and grimy after our long jour- 
ney! He had assumed an attitude of careless 
ease, supporting his right elbow with his left 
hand. His right hand was lifted, and with the 
forefinger of that hand he pointed very lei- 
surely to the right or to the left. None of us 
had the slightest idea of the sinister meaning 
behind that little movement of a man’s finger, 
pointing now to the right and now to the left, 
but far more frequently to the left. 

It was my turn. Somebody whispered to me 
that to be sent to the right side would mean 
work, the way to the left being for the sick and 
those incapable of work, who would be sent to 
a special camp. I just waited for things to take 
their course, the first of many such times to 
come. My haversack weighed me down a bit 


17 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


to the left, but I made an effort to walk up- 
right. The SS man looked me over, appeared 
to hesitate, then put both his hands on my 
shoulders. I tried very hard to look smart, and 
he turned my shoulders very slowly until I 
faced right, and I moved over to that side. 

The significance of the finger game was ex- 
plained to us in the evening. It was the first 
selection, the first verdict made on our exist- 
ence or non-existence. For the great majority 
of our transport, about go per cent, it meant 
death. Their sentence was carried out within 
the next few hours. Those who were sent to 
the left were marched from the station straight 
to the crematorium. This building, as I was 
told by someone who worked there, had the 
word “bath” written over its doors in several 
Furopean languages. On entering, each pris- 
oner was handed a piece of soap, and then— 
but mercifully I do not need to describe the 
events which followed. Many accounts have 
been written about this horror. 

We who were saved, the minority of our 
transport, found out the truth in the evening. 
I inquired from prisoners who had been there 


18 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


for some time where my colleague and friend 
P—— had been sent. 

“Was he sent to the left side?” 

“Yes,” I replied. 

“Then you can see him there,” I was told. 

“Where?” A hand pointed to the chimney 
a few hundred yards off, which was sending 
a column of flame up into the gray sky of 
Poland. It dissolved into a sinister cloud of 
smoke. 

“That’s where your friend is, floating up to 
Heaven,” was the answer. But I still did not 
understand until the truth was explained to me 
in plain words. 

But I am telling things out of their turn. 
From a psychological point of view, we had a 
long, long way in front of us from the break 
of that dawn at the station until our first 
night’s rest at the camp. 

Escorted by SS guards with loaded guns, we 
were made to run from the station, past elec- 
trically charged barbed wire, through the 
camp, to the cleansing station; for those of us 
who had passed the first selection, this was a 
real bath. Again our illusion of reprieve found 


19 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


confirmation. The SS men seemed almost 
charming. Soon we found out their reason. 
They were nice to us as long as they saw 
watches on our wrists and could persuade us in 
well-meaning tones to hand them over. Would 
we not have to hand over all our possessions 
anyway, and why should not that relatively 
nice person have the watch? Maybe one day 
he would do one a good turn. 

We waited in a shed which seemed to be 
the anteroom to the disinfecting chamber. SS 
men appeared and spread out blankets into 
which we had to throw all our possessions, all 
our watches and jewelry. There were still 
naive prisoners among us who asked, to the 
amusement of the more seasoned ones who 
were there as helpers, if they could not keep a 
wedding ring, a medal or a good-luck piece. 
No one could yet grasp the fact that every- 
thing would be taken away. 

I tried to take one of the old prisoners into 
my confidence. Approaching him furtively, I 


pointed to the roll of paper in the inner pocket 
of my coat and said, ‘Look, this is the manu- 
script of a scientific book. I know what you 


20 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


will say; that I should be grateful to escape 
with my life, that that should be all I can ex- 
pect of fate. But I cannot help myself. I must 
keep this manuscript at all costs; it contains my 
life’s work. Do you understand that?” 

Yes, he was beginning to understand. A grin 
spread slowly over his face, first piteous, then 
more amused, mocking, insulting, until he bel- 
lowed one word at me in answer to my ques- 
tion, a word that was ever present in the vo- 
cabulary of the camp inmates: “Shit!” At that 
moment I saw the plain truth and did what 
marked the culminating point of the first phase 
of my psychological reaction: I struck out my 
whole former life. 

Suddenly there was a stir among my fellow 
travelers, who had been standing about with 
pale, frightened faces, helplessly debating. 
Again we heard the hoarsely shouted com- 
mands. We were driven with blows into the 
immediate anteroom of the bath. There we 


assembled around an SS man who waited until 
we had all arrived. Then he said, “I will give 
you two minutes, and I shall time you by my 
watch. In these two minutes you will get fully 


21 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


undressed and drop everything on the floor 
where you are standing. You will take noth- 
ing with you except your shoes, your belt or 
suspenders, and possibly a truss. I am starting 
to count—now!”’ 

With unthinkable haste, people tore off 
their clothes. As the time grew shorter, they 
became increasingly nervous and pulled clum- 
sily at their underwear, belts and shoelaces. 
Then we heard the first sounds of whipping; 
leather straps beating down on naked bodies. 

Next we were herded into another room to 
be shaved: not only our heads were shorn, but 
not a hair was left on our entire bodies. Then 
on to the showers, where we lined up again. 
We hardly recognized each other; but with 
great relief some people noted that real water 
dripped from the sprays. 

While we were waiting for the shower, our 
nakedness was brought home to us: we really 
had nothing now except our bare bodies—even 
minus hair; all we possessed, literally, was our 
naked existence. What else remained for us as 
a material link with our former lives? For me 


there were my glasses and my belt; the latter I 
22 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


had to exchange later on for a piece of bread. 
There was an extra bit of excitement in store 
for the owners of trusses. In the evening the 
senior prisoner in charge of our hut welcomed 
us with a speech in which he gave us his word 
of honor that he would hang, personally, 
“from that beam”—he pointed to it—any per- 
son who had sewn money or precious stones 
into his truss. Proudly he explained that as a 
senior inhabitant the camp laws entitled him 
to do so. 

Where our shoes were concerned, matters 
were not so simple. Although we were sup- 
posed to keep them, those who had fairly de- 
cent pairs had to give them up after all and 
were given in exchange shoes that did not fit. 
In for real trouble were those prisoners who 
had followed the apparently well-meant ad- 
vice (given in the anteroom) of the senior 
prisoners and had shortened their jackboots 
by cutting the tops off, then smearing soap on 
the cut edges to hide the sabotage. The SS men 
seemed to have waited for just that. All sus- 
pected of this crime had to go into a small ad- 
joining room. After a time we again heard the 


23 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


lashings of the strap, and the screams of tor- 
tured men. This time it lasted for quite a 
while. 

Thus the illusions some of us still held were 
destroyed one by one, and then, quite unex- 
pectedly, most of us were overcome by a grim 
sense of humor. We knew that we had noth- 
ing to lose except our so ridiculously naked 
lives. When the showers started to run, we all 
tried very hard to make fun, both about our- 
selves and about each other. After all, real wa- 
ter did flow from the sprays! 

Apart from that strange kind of humor, an- 
other sensation seized us: curiosity. I have ex- 
perienced this kind of curiosity before, as a 
fundamental reaction toward certain strange 
circumstances. When my life was once endan- 
gered by a climbing accident, I felt only one 
sensation at the critical moment: curiosity, 
curiosity as to whether I should come out of it 
alive or with a fractured skull or some other 
injuries. 

Cold curiosity predominated even in Ausch- 
witz, somehow detaching the mind from its 


surroundings, which came to be regarded with 
24 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


a kind of objectivity. At that time one culti- 
vated this state of mind as a means of protec- 
tion. We were anxious to know what would 
happen next; and what would be the conse- 
quence, for example, of our standing in the 
open air, in the chill of late autumn, stark 
naked, and still wet from the showers. In the 
next few days our curiosity evolved into sur- 
prise; surprise that we did not catch cold. 
There were many similar surprises in store 
for new arrivals. The medical men among us 
learned first of all: ‘Textbooks tell lies!” 
Somewhere it is said that man cannot exist 
without sleep for more than a stated number 
of hours. Quite wrong! I had been convinced 
that there were certain things I just could not 
do: I could not sleep without this or I could 
not live with that or the other. The first night 
in Auschwitz we slept in beds which were 
constructed in tiers. On each tier (measuring 
about six-and-a-half to eight feet) slept nine 
men, directly on the boards. Iwo blankets 
were shared by each nine men. We could, of 
course, lie only on our sides, crowded and 


huddled against each other, which had some 
25 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
advantages because of the bitter cold. Though 
it was forbidden to take shoes up to the bunks, 
some people did use them secretly as pillows 
in spite of the fact that they were caked with 
mud. Otherwise one’s head had to rest on the 
crook of an almost dislocated arm. And yet 
sleep came and brought oblivion and relief 
from pain for a few hours. 

I would like to mention a few similar sur- 
prises on how much we could endure: we 
were unable to clean our teeth, and yet, in 
spite of that and a severe vitamin deficiency, 
we had healthier gums than ever before. We 
had to wear the same shirts for half a year, un- 
til they had lost all appearance of being shirts. 
For days we were unable to wash, even par- 
tially, because of frozen water pipes, and yet 
the sores and abrasions on hands which were 
dirty from work in the soil did not suppurate 
(that is, unless there was frostbite). Or for in- 
stance, a light sleeper, who used to be dis- 
turbed by the slightest noise in the next room, 
now found himself lying pressed against a 


comrade who snored loudly a few inches from 
26 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


his ear and yet slept quite soundly through 
the noise. 

If someone now asked of us the truth of 
Dostoevski’s statement that flatly defines man 
as a being who can get used to anything, we 
would reply, “Yes, a man can get used to any- 
thing, but do not ask us how.” But our psy- 
chological investigations have not taken us 
that far yet; neither had we prisoners reached 
that point. We were still in the first phase of 
our psychological reactions. 

The thought of suicide was entertained by 
nearly everyone, if only for a brief time. It 
was born of the hopelessness of the situation, 
the constant danger of death looming over us 
daily and hourly, and the closeness of the 
deaths suffered by many of the others. From 
personal convictions which will be mentioned 
later, I made myself a firm promise, on my 
first evening in camp, that I would not “run 
into the wire.” This was a phrase used in camp 
to describe the most popular method of sui- 
cide—touching the electrically charged barbed- 
wire fence. It was not entirely difficult for me 
to make this decision. There was little point in 


27 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


committing suicide, since, for the average in- 
mate, life expectation, calculating objectively 
and counting all likely chances, was very poor. 
He could not with any assurance expect to be 
among the small percentage of men who sur- 
vived all the selections. The prisoner of 
Auschwitz, in the first phase of shock, did not 
fear death. Even the gas chambers lost their 
horrors for him after the first few days—after 
all, they spared him the act of committing 
suicide. 

Friends whom I have met later have told me 
that I was not one of those whom the shock of 
admission greatly depressed. I only smiled, and 
quite sincerely, when the following episode 
occurred the morning after our first night in 
Auschwitz. In spite of strict orders not to 
leave our “blocks,” a colleague of mine, who 
had arrived in Auschwitz several weeks pre- 
viously, smuggled himself into our hut. He 
wanted to calm and comfort us and tell us a 
few things. He had become so thin that at 
first we did not recognize him. With a show 
of good humor and a devil-may-care attitude 
he gave us a few hurried tips: “Don’t be 
afraid! Don’t fear the selections! Dr. M— 


28 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


(the SS medical chief) has a soft spot for doc- 
tors.” (This was wrong; my friend’s kindly 
words were misleading. One prisoner, the doc- 
tor of a block of huts and a man of some sixty 
years, told me how he had entreated Dr. M—— 
to let off his son, who was destined for gas. Dr. 
M-—— coldly refused.) 

“But one thing I beg of you”; he continued, 
“shave daily, if at all possible, even if you have 
to use a piece of glass to do it... even if you 
have to give your last piece of bread for it. 
You will look younger and the scraping will 
make your cheeks look ruddier. If you want to 
stay alive, there is only one way: look fit for 
work. If you even limp, because, let us say, 
you have a small blister on your heel, and an 
SS man spots this, he will wave you aside and 
the next day you are sure to be gassed. Do you 
know what we mean by a ‘Moslem’? A man 
who looks miserable, down and out, sick and 
emaciated, and who cannot manage hard phys- 
ical labor any longer . . . that is a ‘Moslem.’ 
Sooner or later, usually sooner, every ‘Mos- 
lem’ goes to the gas chambers. Therefore, re- 
member: shave, stand and walk smartly; then 
you need not be afraid of gas. All of you 


ao 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


standing here, even if you have only been 
here twenty-four hours, you need not fear gas, 
except perhaps you.” And then he pointed to 
me and said, “I hope you don’t mind my tell- 
ing you frankly.” To the others he repeated, 
“Of all of you he is the only one who must 
fear the next selection. So, don’t worry!” 

And I smiled. Iam now convinced that any- 
one in my place on that day would have done 
the same. 


It was Lessing who once said, “There are 
things which must cause you to lose your rea- 
son or you have none to lose.” An abnormal 
reaction to an abnormal situation is normal be- 
havior. Even we psychiatrists expect the reac- 
tions of a man to an abnormal situation, such 
as being committed to an asylum, to be abnor- 
mal in proportion to the degree of his nor- 
mality. The reaction of a man to his admis- 
sion to a concentration camp also represents 
an abnormal state of mind, but judged objec- 
tively it is a normal and, as will be shown later, 
typical reaction to the given circumstances. 
These reactions, as I have described them, be- 


30 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


gan to change in a few days. The prisoner 
passed from the first to the second phase: the 
phase of relative apathy, in which he achieved 
a kind of emotional death. 

Apart from the already described reactions, 
the newly arrived prisoner experienced the 
tortures of other most painful emotions, all of 
which he tried to deaden. First of all, there 
was his boundless longing for his home and his 
family. This often could become so acute that 
he felt himself consumed by longing. Then 
there was disgust; disgust with all the ugliness 
which surrounded him, even in its mere ex- 
ternal forms. 

Most of the prisoners were given a uniform 
of rags which would have made a scarecrow 
elegant by comparison. Between the huts in 
the camp lay pure filth, and the more one 
worked to clear it away, the more one had to 
come in contact with it. It was a favorite prac- 
tice to detail a new arrival to a work group 
whose job was to clean the latrines and remove 
the sewage. If, as usually happened, some of 
the excrement splashed into his face during its 
transport over bumpy fields, any sign of dis- 


31 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


gust by the prisoner or any attempt to wipe 
off the filth would only be punished with a 
blow from a Capo. And thus the mortification 
of normal reactions was hastened. 

At first the prisoner looked away if he saw 
the punishment parades of another group; he 
could not bear to see fellow prisoners march 
up and down for hours in the mire, their 
movements directed by blows. Days or weeks 
later things changed. Early in the morning, 
when it was still dark, the prisoner stood in 
front of the gate with his detachment, ready 
to march. He heard a scream and saw how a 
comrade was knocked down, pulled to his feet 
again, and knocked down once more—and 
why? He was feverish but had reported to 
sick-bay at an improper time. He was being 
punished for this irregular attempt to be re- 
lieved of his duties. 

But the prisoner who had passed into the 
second stage of his psychological reactions did 
not avert his eyes any more. By then his feel- 
ings were blunted, and he watched unmoved. 
Another example: he found himself waiting at 
sick-bay, hoping to be granted two days of 


a2 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


light work inside the camp because of injuries 
or perhaps edema or fever. He stood unmoved 
while a twelve-year-old boy was carried in 
who had been forced to stand at attention for 
hours in the snow or to work outside with 
bare feet because there were no shoes for him 
in the camp. His toes had become frostbitten, 
and the doctor on duty picked off the black 
gangrenous stumps with tweezers, one by one. 
Disgust, horror and pity are emotions that our 
spectator could not really feel any more. The 
sufferers, the dying and the dead, became such 
commonplace sights to him after a few weeks 
of camp life that they could not move him any 
more. 


I spent some time in a hut for typhus pa- 
tients who ran very high temperatures and 
were often delirious, many of them moribund. 
After one of them had just died, I watched 
without any emotional upset the scene that 
followed, which was repeated over and over 
again with each death. One by one the pris- 
oners approached the still warm body. One 


grabbed the remains of a messy meal of pota- 
33 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


toes; another decided that the corpse’s wooden 
shoes were an improvement on his own, and 
exchanged them. A third man did the same 
with the dead man’s coat, and another was 
glad to be able to secure some—just imagine! — 
genuine string. 

All this I watched with unconcern. Even- 
tually I asked the “nurse” to remove the body. 
When he decided to do so, he took the corpse 
by its legs, allowing it to drop into the small 
corridor between the two rows of boards 
which were the beds for the fifty typhus pa- 
tients, and dragged it across the bumpy 
earthen floor toward the door. The two steps 
which led up into the open air always consti- 
tuted a problem for us, since we were exhaust- 
ed from a chronic lack of food. After a few 
months’ stay in the camp we could not walk 
up those steps, which were each about six 
inches high, without putting our hands on the 
door jambs to pull ourselves up. 

The man with the corpse approached the 
steps. Wearily he dragged himself up. Then 
the body: first the feet, then the trunk, and 
finally—with an uncanny rattling noise—the 


34 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


head of the corpse bumped up the two steps. 

My place was on the opposite side of the 
hut, next to the small, sole window, which was 
built near the floor. While my cold hands 
clasped a bowl of hot soup from which I 
sipped greedily, I happened to look out the 
window. The corpse which had just been re- 
moved stared in at me with glazed eyes. Iwo 
hours before I had spoken to that man. Now I 
continued sipping my soup. 

If my lack of emotion had not surprised me 
from the standpoint of professional interest, I 
would not remember this incident now, be- 
cause there was so little feeling involved in it. 


Apathy, the blunting of the emotions and 
the feeling that one could not care any more, 
were the symptoms arising during the second 
stage of the prisoner’s psychological reactions, 
and which eventually made him insensitive to 
daily and hourly beatings. By means of this in- 
sensibility the prisoner soon surrounded him- 
self with a very necessary protective shell. 

Beatings occurred on the slightest provoca- 


tion, sometimes for no reason at all. For ex- 
35 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


ample, bread was rationed out at our work 
site and we had to line up for it. Once, the 
man behind me stood off a little to one side 
and that lack of symmetry displeased the SS 
guard. I did not know what was going on in 
the line behind me, nor in the mind of the SS 
guard, but suddenly I received two sharp 
blows on my head. Only then did I spot the 
guard at my side who was using his stick. At 
such a moment it is not the physical pain 
which hurts the most (and this applies to 
adults as much as to punished children); it is 
the mental agony caused by the injustice, the 
unreasonableness of it all. 

Strangely enough, a blow which does not 
even find its mark can, under certain circum- 
stances, hurt more than one that finds its 
mark. Once I was standing on a railway track 
in a snowstorm. In spite of the weather our 
party had to keep on working. I worked quite 
hard at mending the track with gravel, since 
that was the only way to keep warm. For only 
one moment I paused to get my breath and to 


lean on my shovel. Unfortunately the guard 
turned around just then and thought I was 


36 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


loafing. The pain he caused me was not from 
the insults or the blows. That guard did not 
think it worth his while to say anything, not 
even a swear word, to the ragged, emaciated 
figure standing before him, which probably 
reminded him only vaguely of a human form. 
Instead, he playfully picked up a stone and 
threw it at me. That, to me, seemed the way 
to attract the attention of a beast, to call a do- 
mestic animal back to its job, a creature with 
which you have so little in common that you 
do not even punish it. 

The most painful part of beatings is the in- 
sult which they imply. At one time we had to 
carry some long, heavy girders over icy tracks. 
If one man slipped, he endangered not only 
himself but all the others who carried the same 
girder. An old friend of mine had a congeni- 
tally dislocated hip. He was glad to be capable 
of working in spite of it, since the physically 
disabled were almost certainly sent to death 
when a selection took place. He limped over 


the track with an especially heavy girder, and 
seemed about to fall and drag the others with 
him. As yet, I was not carrying a girder so I 


37 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
jumped to his assistance without stopping to 
think. I was immediately hit on the back, 
rudely reprimanded and ordered to return to 
my place. A few minutes previously the same 
guard who struck me had told us deprecating- 
ly that we “pigs” lacked the spirit of com- 
radeship. 

Another time, in a forest, with the tempera- 
ture at 2°F, we began to dig up the topsoil, 
which was frozen hard, in order to lay water 
pipes. By then I had grown rather weak physi- 
cally. Along came a foreman with chubby 
rosy cheeks. His face definitely reminded me 
of a pig’s head. I noticed that he wore lovely 
warm gloves in that bitter cold. For a time he 
watched me silently. I felt that trouble was 
brewing, for in front of me lay the mound of 
earth which showed exactly how much I had 
dug. 

Then he began: “You pig, I have been 
watching you the whole time! I’ll teach you to 
work, yet! Wait tll you dig dirt with your 
teeth—you'll die like an animal! In two days 


Pll finish you off! You’ve never done a stroke 
38 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


of work in your life. What were you, swine? 
A businessman?” 

I was past caring. But I had to take his 
threat of killing me seriously, so I straightened 
up and looked him directly in the eye. “I was 
a doctor—a specialist.” 

“What? A doctor? I bet you got a lot of 
money out of people.” 

“As it happens, I did most of my work for 
no money at all, in clinics for the poor.” But, 
now, I had said too much. He threw himself 
on me and knocked me down, shouting like a 
madman. I can no longer remember what he 
shouted. 

I want to show with this apparently trivial 
story that there are moments when indigna- 
tion can rouse even a seemingly hardened 
prisoner—indignation not about cruelty or 
pain, but about the insult connected with it. 
‘That time blood rushed to my head because I 
had to listen to a man judge my life who had 
so little idea of it, a man (I must confess: the 
following remark, which I made to my fellow- 


prisoners after the scene, afforded me childish 
relief) “who looked so vulgar and brutal that 


39 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


the nurse in the out-patient ward in my hos- 
pital would not even have admitted him to the 
waiting room.” 

Fortunately the Capo in my working party 
was obligated to me; he had taken a liking to 
me because I listened to his love stories and 
matrimonial troubles, which he poured out 
during the long marches to our work site. I 
had made an impression on him with my diag- 
nosis of his character and with my psycho- 
therapeutic advice. After that he was grateful, 
and this had already been of value to me. On 
several previous occasions he had reserved a 
place for me next to him in one of the first five 
rows of our detachment, which usually con- 
sisted of two hundred and eighty men. That 
favor was important. We had to line up early 
in the morning while it was still dark. Every- 
body was afraid of being late and of having to 
stand in the back rows. If men were required 
for an unpleasant and disliked job, the senior 
Capo appeared and usually collected the men 
he needed from the back rows. These men had 
to march away to another, especially dreaded 
kind of work under the command of strange 


40 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 
guards. Occasionally the senior Capo chose 
men from the first five rows, just to catch 
those who tried to be clever. All protests and 
entreaties were silenced by a few well-aimed 
kicks, and the chosen victims were chased to 
the meeting place with shouts and blows. 
However, as long as my Capo felt the need 
of pouring out his heart, this could not happen 
to me. I had a guaranteed place of honor next 
to him. But there was another advantage, too. 
Like nearly all the camp inmates I was suffer- 
ing from edema. My legs were so swollen and 
the skin on them so tightly stretched that I 
could scarcely bend my knees, I had to leave 
my shoes unlaced in order to make them fit 
my swollen feet. There would not have been 
space for socks even if I had had any. So my 
partly bare feet were always wet and my shoes 
always full of snow. This, of course, caused 
frostbite and chilblains. Every single step be- 
came real torture. Clumps of ice formed on 
our shoes during our marches over snow-cov- 
ered fields. Over and again men slipped and 
those following behind stumbled on top of 
them. Then the column would stop for a mo- 


41 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
ment, but not for long. One of the guards soon 
took action and worked over the men with the 
butt of his rifle to make them get up quickly. 
The more to the front of the column you 
were, the less often you were disturbed by 
having to stop and then to make up for lost 
time by running on your painful feet. I was 
very happy to be the personally appointed 
physician to His Honor the Capo, and to 
march in the first row at an even pace. 

As an additional payment for my services, I 
could be sure that as long as soup was being 
dealt out at lunchtime at our work site, he 
would, when my turn came, dip the ladle 
right to the bottom of the vat and fish out a 
few peas. This Capo, a former army officer, 
even had the courage to whisper to the fore- 
man, whom I had quarreled with, that he 
knew me to be an unusually good worker. 
That didn’t help matters, but he nevertheless 
managed to save my life (one of the many 
times it was to be saved). The day after the 
episode with the foreman he smuggled me into 


another work party. 
42 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


There were foremen who felt sorry for us 
and who did their best to ease our situation, at 
least at the building site. But even they kept on 
reminding us that an ordinary laborer did sev- 
eral times as much work as we did, and in a 
shorter time. But they did see reason if they 
were told that a normal workman did not live 
on 1044 ounces of bread (theoretically—ac- 
tually we often had less )and 134 pints of thin 
soup per day; that a normal laborer did not 
live under the mental stress we had to submit 
to, not having news of our families, who had 
either been sent to another camp or gassed 
right away; that a normal workman was not 
threatened by death continuously, daily and 
hourly. I even allowed myself to say once to 
a kindly foreman, “If you could learn from 
me how to do a brain operation in as short a 
time as I am learning this road work from you, 
I would have great respect for you.” And he 
grinned. 


Apathy, the main symptom of the second 
phase, was a necessary mechanism of self-de- 
fense. Reality dimmed, and all efforts and all 


43 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


emotions were centered on one task: preserv- 
ing one’s own life and that of the other fellow. 
It was typical to hear the prisoners, while they 
were being herded back to camp from their 
work sites in the evening, sigh with relief and 
say, “Well, another day is over.” 

It can be readily understood that such a 
state of strain, coupled with the constant ne- 
cessity of concentrating on the task of staying 
alive, forced the prisoner’s inner life down to 
a primitive level. Several of my colleagues in 
camp who were trained in psychoanalysis 
often spoke of a “regression” in the camp in- 
mate—a retreat to a more primitive form of 
mental life. His wishes and desires became ob- 
vious in his dreams. 

What did the prisoner dream about most 
frequently? Of bread, cake, cigarettes, and 
nice warm baths. The lack of having these 
simple desires satisfied led him to seek wish- 
fulfillment in dreams. Whether these dreagns 
did any good is another matter; the dreamer 
had to wake from them to the reality of camp 
life, and to the terrible contrast between that 
and his dream illusions. 


44 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


I shall never forget how I was roused one 
night by the groans of a fellow prisoner, who 
threw himself about in his sleep, obviously 
having a horrible nightmare. Since I had al- 
ways been especially sorry for people who 
suffered from fearful dreams or deliria, I 
wanted to wake the poor man. Suddenly I 
drew back the hand which was ready to shake 
him, frightened at the thing I was about to do. 
At that moment I became intensely conscious 
of the fact that no dream, no matter how hor- 
rible, could be as bad as the reality of the 
camp which surrounded us, and to which I 
was about to recall him. 


Because of the high degree of undernourish- 
ment which the prisoners suffered, it was nat- 
ural that the desire for food was the major 
primitive instinct around which mental life 
centered. Let us observe the majority of pris- 
oners when they happened to work near each 
other and were, for once, not closely watched. 
They would immediately start discussing food. 
One fellow would ask another working next 
to him in the ditch what his favorite dishes 


45 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


were. Then they would exchange recipes and 
plan the menu for the day when they would 
have a reunion—the day in a distant future 
when they would be liberated and returned 
home. They would go on and on, picturing it 
all in detail, until suddenly a warning was 
passed down the trench, usually in the form of 
a special password or number: “The guard is 
coming.” 

I always regarded the discussions about food 
as dangerous. Is it not wrong to provoke the 
organism with such detailed and affective pic- 
tures of delicacies when it has somehow man- 
aged to adapt itself to extremely small rations 
and low calories? ‘Though it may afford mo- 
mentary psychological relief, it is an illusion 
which physiologically, surely, must not be 
without danger. 

During the latter part of our imprisonment, 
the daily ration consisted of very watery soup 
given out once daily, and the usual small bread 
ration. In addition to that, there was the so- 
called “extra allowance,” consisting of three- 
fourths of an ounce of margarine, or of a slice 


of poor quality sausage, or of a little piece of 
46 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


cheese, or a bit of synthetic honey, or a spoon- 
ful of watery jam, varying daily. In calories, 
this diet was absolutely inadequate, especially 
taking into consideration our heavy manual 
work and our constant exposure to the cold in 
inadequate clothing. The sick who were “un- 
der special care”—that is, those who were al- 
lowed to lie in the huts instead of leaving the 
camp for work—were even worse off. 

When the last layers of subcutaneous fat 
had vanished, and we looked like skeletons 
disguised with skin and rags, we could watch 
our bodies beginning to devour themselves. 
The organism digested its own protein, and 
the muscles disappeared. Then the body had 
no powers of resistance left. One after another 
the members of the little community in our hut 
died. Each of us could calculate with fair ac- 
curacy whose turn would be next, and when 
his own would come. After many observa- 
tions we knew the symptoms well, which 
made the correctness of our prognoses quite 
certain. “He won’t last long,” or, “This is the 
next one,” we whispered to each other, and 


when, during our daily search for lice, we saw 
47 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


our own naked bodies in the evening, we 
thought alike: This body here, my body, is 
really a corpse already. What has become of 
me? I am but a small portion of a great mass 
of human flesh ... of a mass behind barbed 
wire, crowded into a few earthen huts; a mass 
of which daily a certain portion begins to rot 
because it has become lifeless. 

I mentioned above how unavoidable were 
the thoughts about food and favorite dishes 
which forced themselves into the conscious- 
ness of the prisoner, whenever he had a mo- 
ment to spare. Perhaps it can be understood, 
then, that even the strongest of us was longing 
for the time when he would have fairly good 
food again, not for the sake of good food it- 
self, but for the sake of knowing that the sub- 
human existence, which had made us unable 
to think of anything other than food, would 
at last cease. 

Those who have not gone through a similar 
experience can hardly conceive of the soul- 
destroying mental conflict and clashes of will 
power which a famished man experiences. 


They can hardly grasp what it means to stand 
48 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

digging in a trench, listening only for the 
siren to announce 9:30 or 10:00 A.M.—the 
half-hour lunch interval—when bread would 
be rationed out (as long as it was still avail- 
able); repeatedly asking the foreman—if he 
wasn’t a disagreeable fellow—what the time 
was; and tenderly touching a piece of bread in 
one’s coat pocket, first stroking it with frozen 
gloveless fingers, then breaking off a crumb 
and putting it in one’s mouth and finally, with 
the last bit of will power, pocketing it again, 
having promised oneself that morning to hold 
out till afternoon. 

We could hold endless debates on the sense 
or nonsense of certain methods of dealing with 
the small bread ration, which was given out 
only once daily during the latter part of our 
confinement. There were two schools of 
thought. One was in favor of eating up the ra- 
tion immediately. This had the twofold ad- 
vantage of satisfying the worst hunger pangs 
for a very short time at least once a day and of 


safeguarding against possible theft or loss of 


the ration. lhe second group, which held with 
49 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
dividing the ration up, used different argu- 
ments. I finally joined their ranks. 

The most ghastly moment of the twenty- 
four hours of camp life was the awakening, 
when, at a still nocturnal hour, the three shrill 
blows of a whistle tore us pitilessly from our 
exhausted sleep and from the longings in our 
dreams. We then began the tussle with our 
wet shoes, into which we could scarcely force 
our feet, which were sore and swollen with 
edema. And there were the usual moans and 
groans about petty troubles, such as the snap- 
ping of wires which replaced shoelaces. One 
morning I heard someone, whom I knew to be 
brave and dignified, cry like a child because 
he finally had to go to the snowy marching 
grounds in his bare feet, as his shoes were too 
shrunken for him to wear. In those ghastly 
minutes, I found a little bit of comfort; a small 
piece of bread which I drew out of my pocket 
and munched with absorbed delight. 


Undernourishment, besides being the cause 


of the general preoccupation with food, prob- 
ably also explains the fact that the sexual urge 


50 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

was generally absent. Apart from the initial 
effects of shock, this appears to be the only 
explanation of a phenomenon which a psy- 
chologist was bound to observe in those all- 
male camps: that, as opposed to all other 
strictly male establishments—such as army bar- 
racks—there was little sexual perversion. Even 
in his dreams the prisoner did not seem to con- 
cern himself with sex, although his frustrated 
emotions and his finer, higher feelings did find 
definite expression in them. 

With the majority of the prisoners, the 
primitive life and the effort of having to con- 
centrate on just saving one’s skin led to a total 
disregard of anything not serving that pur- 
pose, and explained the prisoners’ complete 
lack of sentiment. This was brought home to 
me on my transfer from Auschwitz to a camp 
affliated with Dachau. The train which car- 
ried us—about 2,000 prisoners—passed through 
Vienna. At about midnight we passed one of 
the Viennese railway stations. The track was 
going to lead us past the street where I was 


born, past the house where I had lived many 


51 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


years of my life, in fact, until I was taken 
prisoner. 

There were fifty of us in the prison car, 
which had two small, barred peepholes. There 
was only enough room for one group to squat 
on the floor, while the others, who had to 
stand up for hours, crowded round the peep- 
holes. Standing on tiptoe and looking past the 
others’ heads through the bars of the window, 
I caught an eerie glimpse of my native town. 
We all felt more dead than alive, since we 
thought that our transport was heading for 
the camp at Mauthausen and that we had only 
one or two weeks to live. I had a distinct feel- 
ing that I saw the streets, the squares and the 
houses of my childhood with the eyes of a 
dead man who had come back from another 
world and was looking down on a ghostly 
city. 

After hours of delay the train left the sta- 
tion. And there was the street—my street! ‘The 
young lads who had a number of years of 
camp life behind them and for whom such a 
journey was a great event stared attentively 
through the peephole. I began to beg them, to 


52 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


entreat them, to let me stand in-front for one 
moment only. I tried to explain how much a 
look through that window meant to me just 
then. My request was refused with rudeness 
and cynicism: “You lived here all those years? 
Well, then you have seen quite enough 
already!” 


In general there was also a “cultural hiber- 
nation” in the camp. There were two excep- 
tions to this: politics and religion. Politics 
were talked about everywhere in camp, al- 
most continuously; the discussions were based 
chiefly on rumors, which were snapped up 
and passed around avidly. The rumors about 
the military situation were usually contradic- 
tory. [They followed one another rapidly and 
succeeded only in making a contribution to 
the war of nerves that was waged in the minds 
of all the prisoners. Many times, hopes for a 
speedy end to the war, which had been fanned 
by optimistic rumors, were disappointed. Some 
men lost all hope, but it was the incorrigible 
optimists who were the most irritating com- 
panions. 


53 


MAN'S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


The religious interest of the prisoners, as 
far and as soon as it developed, was the most 
sincere imaginable. The depth and vigor of 
religious belief often surprised and moved a 
new arrival. Most impressive in this connec- 
tion were improvised prayers or services in the 
corner of a hut, or in the darkness of the 
locked cattle truck in which we were brought 
back from a distant work site, tired, hungry 
and frozen in our ragged clothing. 

In the winter and spring of 1945 there was 
an outbreak of typhus which infected nearly 
all the prisoners. The mortality was great 
among the weak, who had to keep on with 
their hard work as long as they possibly could. 
The quarters for the sick were most inade- 
quate, there were practically no medicines or 
attendants. Some of the symptoms of the dis- 
ease were extremely disagreeable: an irrepres- 
sible aversion to even a scrap of food (which 
was an additional danger to life) and terrible 
attacks of delirium. The worst case of delirium 
was suffered by a friend of mine who thought 
that he was dying and wanted to pray. In his 
delirium he could not find the words to do so. 


54 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


To avoid these attacks of delirium, I tried, as 
did many of the others, to keep awake for 
most of the night. For hours I composed 
speeches in my mind. Eventually I began to 
reconstruct the manuscript which I had lost in 
the disinfection chamber of Auschwitz, and 
scribbled the key words in shorthand on tiny 
scraps of paper. 

Occasionally a scientific debate developed 
in camp. Once I witnessed something I had 
never seen, even in my normal life, although 
it lay somewhat near my own professional in- 
terests: a spiritualistic seance. I had been in- 
vited to attend by the camp’s chief doctor 
(also a prisoner), who knew that I was a spe- 
cialist in psychiatry. The meeting took place 
in his small, private room in the sick quarters. 
A small circle had gathered, among them, 
quite illegally, the warrant officer from the 
sanitation squad. 

One man began to invoke the spirits with a 
kind of prayer. The camp’s clerk sat in front 
of a blank sheet of paper, without any con- 
scious intention of writing. During the next 
ten minutes (after which time the seance was 


55 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


terminated because of the medium’s failure to 
conjure the spirits to appear) his pencil slow- 
ly drew lines across the paper, forming quite 
legibly “var v.” It was asserted that the clerk 
had never learned Latin and that he had never 
before heard the words “vae victis”—woe to 
the vanquished. In my opinion he must have 
heard them once in his life, without recollect- 
ing them, and they must have been available 
to the “spirit” (the spirit of his subconscious 
mind) at that time, a few months before our 
liberation and the end of the war. 


In spite of all the enforced physical and 
mental primitiveness of the life in a concen- 
tration camp, it was possible for spiritual life 
to deepen. Sensitive people who were used to 
a rich intellectual life may have suffered much 
pain (they were often of a delicate constitu- 
tion), but the damage to their inner selves was 
less. They were able to retreat from their ter- 
rible surroundings to a life of inner riches and 
spiritual freedom. Only in this way can one 


explain the apparent paradox that some pris- 
oners of a less hardy make-up often seemed to 


56 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


survive camp life better than did those of a ro- 
bust nature. In order to make myself clear, I 
am forced to fall back on personal experience. 
Let me tell what happened on those early 
mornings when we had to march to our work 
site. 

There were shouted commands: “Detach- 
ment, forward march! Left-2-3-4! Left-2-3-4! 
Left-2-3-4! Left-2-3-4! First man about, left 
and left and left and left! Caps off!” These 
words sound in my ears even now. At the order 
“Caps off!” we passed the gate of the camp, 
and searchlights were trained upon us. Who- 
ever did not march smartly got a kick. And 
worse off was the man who, because of the 
cold, had pulled his cap back over his ears be- 
fore permission was given. 

We stumbled on in the darkness, over big 
stones and through large puddles, along the 
one road leading from the camp. The accom- 
panying guards kept shouting at us and driving 
us with the butts of their rifles. Anyone with 
very sore feet supported himself on his neigh- 
bor’s arm. Hardly a word was spoken; the icy 


wind did not encourage talk. Hiding his 
57 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


mouth behind his upturned collar, the man 
marching next to me whispered suddenly: “If 
our wives could see us now! I do hope they 
are better off in their camps and don’t know 
what is happening to us.” 

That brought thoughts of my own wife to 
mind. And as we stumbled on for miles, slip- 
ping on icy spots, supporting each other time 
and again, dragging one another up and on- 
ward, nothing was said, but we both knew: 
each of us was thinking of his wife. Occasion- 
ally I looked at the sky, where the stars were 
fading and the pink light of the morning was 
beginning to spread behind a dark bank of 
clouds. But my mind clung to my wife’s image, 
imagining it with an uncanny acuteness. I 
heard her answering me, saw her smile, her 
frank and encouraging look. Real or not, her 
look was then more luminous than the sun 
which was beginning to rise. 

A thought transfixed me: for the first time 
in my life I saw the truth as it is set into song 


by so many poets, proclaimed as the final wis- 
dom by so many thinkers. The truth—that love 
is the ultimate and the highest goal to which 


58 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


man can aspire. Then I grasped the meaning of 
the greatest secret that human poetry and 
human thought and belief have to impart: The 
salvation of man is through love and in love. I 
understood how a man who has nothing left 
in this world still may know bliss, be it only 
for a brief moment, in the contemplation of 
his beloved. In a position of utter desolation, 
when man cannot express himself in positive 
action, when his only achievement may con- 
sist in enduring his sufferings in the right way 
—an honorable way—in such a position man 
can, through loving contemplation of the 
image he carries of his beloved, achieve fulfill- 
ment. For the first time in my life I was able 
to understand the meaning of the words, “The 
angels are lost in perpetual contemplation of 
an infinite glory.” 

In front of me a man stumbled and those 
following him fell on top of him. The guard 
rushed over and used his whip on them all. 
Thus my thoughts were interrupted for a few 
minutes. But soon my soul found its way back 
from the prisoner’s existence to another world, 


and I resumed talk with my loved one: I asked 


59 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


her questions, and she answered; she ques- 
tioned me in return, and [ answered. 

“Stop!” We had arrived at our work site. 
Everybody rushed into the dark hut in the 
hope of getting a fairly decent tool. Each 
prisoner got a spade or a pickax. 

“Can’t you hurry up, you pigs?” Soon we 
had resumed the previous day’s positions in the 
ditch. The frozen ground cracked under the 
point of the pickaxes, and sparks flew. The 
men were silent, their brains numb. 

My mind still clung to the image of my 
wife. A thought crossed my mind: I didn’t 
even know if she were still alive. I knew only 
one thing—which I have learned well by now: 
Love goes very far beyond the physical per- 
son of the beloved. It finds its deepest meaning 
in his spiritual being, his inner self. Whether 
or not he is actually present, whether or not he 
is still alive at all, ceases somehow to be of im- 
portance. 

I did not know whether my wife was alive, 
and I had no means of finding out (during all 
my prison life there was no outgoing or 1in- 


coming mail); but at that moment it ceased to 
60 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


matter. There was no need for me to know; 
nothing could touch the strength of my love, 
my thoughts, and the image of my beloved. 
Had I known then that my wife was dead, I 
think that I would still have given myself, un- 
disturbed by that knowledge, to the contem- 
plation of her image, and that my mental con- 
versation with her would have been just as 
vivid and just as satisfying. “Set me like a seal 
upon thy heart, love is as strong as death.” 


This intensification of inner life helped the 
prisoner find a refuge from the emptiness, 
desolation and spiritual poverty of his exist- 
ence, by letting him escape into the past. When 
given free rein, his imagination played with 
past events, often not important ones, but 
minor happenings and trifling things. His nos- 
talgic memory glorified them and they as- 
sumed a strange character. Their world and 
their existence seemed very distant and the 
spirit reached out for them longingly: In my 
mind [ took bus rides, unlocked the front door 
of my apartment, answered my telephone, 


switched on the electric lights. Our thoughts 
61 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


often centered on such details, and these mem- 
ories could move one to tears. 

As the inner life of the prisoner tended to 
become more intense, he also experienced the 
beauty of art and nature as never before. Un- 
der their influence he sometimes even forgot 
his own frightful circumstances. If someone 
had seen our faces on the journey from Ausch- 
witz to a Bavarian camp as we beheld the 
mountains of Salzburg with their summits 
glowing in the sunset, through the little barred 
windows of the prison carriage, he would 
never have believed that those were the faces 
of men who had given up all hope of life 
and liberty. Despite that factor—or maybe be- 
cause of it—we were carried away by nature’s 
beauty, which we had missed for so long. 

In camp, too, a man might draw the atten- 
tion of a comrade working next to him to a 
nice view of the setting sun shining through 
the tall trees of the Bavarian woods (as in the 
famous water color by Diirer), the same 
woods in which we had built an enormous, 
hidden munitions plant. One evening, when 


we were already resting on the floor of our 
62 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


hut, dead tired, soup bowls in hand, a fellow 
prisoner rushed in and asked us to run out to 
the assembly grounds and see the wonderful 
sunset. Standing outside we saw sinister clouds 
glowing in the west and the whole sky alive 
with clouds of ever-changing shapes and 
colors, from steel blue to blood red. The des- 
olate gray mud huts provided a sharp contrast, 
while the puddles on the muddy ground re- 
flected the glowing sky. Then, after minutes 
of moving silence, one prisoner said to another, 
“How beautiful the world could be!” 
Another time we were at work in a trench. 
The dawn was gray around us; gray was the 
sky above; gray the snow in the pale light of 
dawn; gray the rags in which my fellow pris- 
oners were clad, and gray their faces. I was 
again conversing silently with my wife, or 
perhaps I was struggling to find the reason for 
my sufferings, my slow dying. In a last violent 
protest against the hopelessness of imminent 
death, I sensed my spirit piercing through the 
enveloping gioom. I felt it transcend that hope- 
less, meaningiess world, and from somewhere 


I heard a victorious “Yes” in answer to my 


63 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


question of the existence of an ultimate pur- 
pose. At that moment a light was lit in a dis- 
tant farmhouse, which stood on the horizon 
as if painted there, in the midst of the miser- 
able gray of a dawning morning in Bavaria. 
“Et lux in tenebris lucet”—and the light shineth 
in the darkness. For hours I stood hacking at 
the icy ground. The guard passed by, insulting 
me, and once again I communed with my be- 
loved. More and more I felt that she was pres- 
ent, that she was with me; I had the feeling 
that I was able to touch her, able to stretch 
out my hand and grasp hers. The feeling was 
very strong: she was there. Then, at that very 
moment, a bird flew down silently and perched 
just in front of me, on the heap of soil which 
I had dug up from the ditch, and looked stead- 
ily at me. 


Earlier, I mentioned art. Is there such a 
thing in a concentration camp? It rather de- 
pends on what one chooses to call art. A kind 
of cabaret was improvised from time to time. 


A hut was cleared temporarily, a few wooden 
benches were pushed or nailed together and a 


64 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


program was drawn up. In the evening those 
who had fairly good positions in camp—the 
Capos and the workers who did not have to 
leave camp on distant marches—assembled 
there. They came to have a few laughs or per- 
haps to cry a little; anyway, to forget. There 
were songs, poems, jokes, some with underly- 
ing satire regarding the camp. All were meant 
to help us forget, and they did help. The gath- 
erings were so effective that a few ordinary 
prisoners went to see the cabaret in spite of 
their fatigue even though they missed their 
daily portion of food by going. 

During the half-hour lunch interval when 
soup (which the contractors paid for and for 
which they did not spend much) was ladled 
out at our work site, we were allowed to as- 
semble in an unfinished engine room. On en- 
tering, everyone got a ladleful of the watery 
soup. While we sipped it greedily, a prisoner 
climbed onto a tub and sang Italian arias. We 
enjoyed the songs, and he was guaranteed a 
double helping of soup, straight “from the bot- 
tom”—that meant with peas! 


Rewards were given in camp not only for 
65 


MAN'S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


entertainment, but also for applause. I, for ex- 
ample, could have found protection (how 
lucky I was never in need of it!) from the 
camp’s most dreaded Capo, who for more than 
one good reason was known as “The Murder- 
ous Capo.” This is how it happened. One eve- 
ning I had the great honor of being invited 
again to the room where the spiritualistic 
seance had taken place. There were gathered 
the same intimate friends of the chief doctor 
and, most illegally, the warrant officer from 
the sanitation squad was again present. The 
Murderous Capo entered the room by chance, 
and he was asked to recite one of his poems, 
which had become famous (or infamous) in 
camp. He did not need to be asked twice and 
quickly produced a kind of diary from which 
he began to read samples of his art. I bit my 
lips ull they hurt in order to keep from laugh- 
ing at one of his love poems, and very likely 
that saved my life. Since I was also generous 
with my applause, my life might have been 
saved even had I been detailed to his working 
party to which [ had previously been assigned 


for one day—a day that was quite enough for 
66 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


me. It was useful, anyway, to be known to 
The Murderous Capo from a favorable angle. 
So I applauded as hard as I could. 

Generally speaking, of course, any pursuit 
of art in camp was somewhat grotesque. I 
would say that the real impression made by 
anything connected with art arose only from 
the ghostlike contrast between the perform- 
ance and the background of desolate camp 
life. I shall never forget how I awoke from the 
deep sleep of exhaustion on my second night 
in Auschwitz—roused by music. The senior 
warden of the hut had some kind of celebra- 
tion in his room, which was near the entrance 
of the hut. Tipsy voices bawled some hack- 
neyed tunes. Suddenly there was a silence and 
into the night a violin sang a desperately sad 
tango, an unusual tune not spoiled by frequent 
playing. The violin wept and a part of me 
wept with it, for on that same day someone 
had a twenty-fourth birthday. That someone 
lay in another part of the Auschwitz camp, 
possibly only a few hundred or a thousand 
yards away, and yet completely out of reach. 
That someone was my wife. 


67 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


To discover that there was any semblance 
of art in a concentration camp must be sur- 
prise enough for an outsider, but he may be 
even more astonished to hear that one could 
find a sense of humor there as well; of course, 
only the faint trace of one, and then only for 
a few seconds or minutes. Humor was another 
of the soul’s weapons in the fight for self- 
preservation. It is well known that humor, 
more than anything else in the human make- 
up, can afford an aloofness and an ability to 
rise above any situation, even if only for a few 
seconds. I practically trained a friend of mine 
who worked next to me on the building site 
to develop a sense of humor. I suggested to 
him that we would promise each other to in- 
vent at least one amusing story daily, about 
some incident that could happen one day after 
our liberation. He was a surgeon and had been 
an assistant on the staff of a large hospital. So 
I once tried to get him to smile by describing 
to him how he would be unable to lose the 
habits of camp life when he returned to his 
former work. On the building site (especially 


when the supervisor made his tour of inspec- 
68 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


tion) the foreman encouraged us to work fast- 
er by shouting: “Action! Action!” I told my 
friend, “One day you will be back in the 
operating room, performing a big abdominal 
operation. Suddenly an orderly will rush in 
announcing the arrival of the senior surgeon 
by shouting, ‘Action! Action!’ ” 

Sometimes the other men invented amusing 
dreams about the future, such as forecasting 
that during a future dinner engagement they 
might forget themselves when the soup was 
served and beg the hostess to ladle it “from 
the bottom.” 


The attempt to develop a sense of humor 
and to see things in a humorous light is some 
kind of a trick learned while mastering the art 
of living. Yet it is possible to practice the art 
of living even in a concentration camp, al- 
though suffering is omnipresent. To draw an 
analogy: a man’s suffering is similar to the be- 
havior of gas. If a certain quantity of gas is 
pumped into an empty chamber, it will fill the 
chamber completely and evenly, no matter 


how big the chamber. Thus suffering com- 
69 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


pletely fills the human soul and conscious 
mind, no matter whether the suffering is great 
or little. Therefore the “size” of human suffer- 
ing is absolutely relative. 

It also follows that a very trifling thing can 
cause the greatest of joys. Take as an example 
something that happened on our journey from 
Auschwitz to the camp affiliated with Dachau. 
We had all been afraid that our transport was 
heading for the Mauthausen camp. We be- 
came more and more tense as we approached 
a certain bridge over the Danube which the 
train would have to cross to reach Mauthausen, 
according to the statement of experienced 
traveling companions. Those who have never 
seen anything similar cannot possibly imagine 
the dance of joy performed in the carriage by 
the prisoners when they saw that our transport 
was not crossing the bridge and was instead 
heading “‘only” for Dachau. 

And again, what happened on our arrival in 
that camp, after a journey lasting two days 
and three nights? There had not been enough 
room for everybody to crouch on the floor of 


the carriage at the same time. The majority of 
70 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


us had to stand all the way, while a few took 
turns at squatting on the scanty straw which 
was soaked with human urine. When we ar- 
rived the first important news that we heard 
from older prisoners was that this compara- 
tively small camp (its population was 2,500) 
had no “oven,” no crematorium, no gas! That 
meant that a person who had become a “Mos- 
lem” could not be taken straight to the gas 
chamber, but would have to wait until a so- 
called “sick convoy” had been arranged to re- 
turn to Auschwitz. This joyful surprise put us 
all in a good mood. The wish of the senior 
warden of our hut in Auschwitz had come 
true: we had come, as quickly as possible, to 
a camp which did not have a “chimney”—un- 
like Auschwitz. We laughed and cracked jokes 
in spite of, and during, all we had to go 
through in the next few hours. 

When we new arrivals were counted, one 
of us was missing. So we had to wait outside 
in the rain and cold wind until the missing 
man was found. He was at last discovered in 
a hut, where he had fallen asleep from exhaus- 


tion. Then the roll call was turned into a pun- 
71 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


ishment parade. All through the night and 
late into the next morning, we had to stand 
outside, frozen and soaked to the skin after 
the strain of our long journey. And yet we 
were all very pleased! There was no chimney 
in this camp and Auschwitz was a long way 
off. 

Another time we saw a group of convicts 
pass our work site. How obvious the relativity 
of all suffering appeared to us then! We en- 
vied those prisoners their relatively well-regu- 
lated, secure and happy life. They surely had 
regular opportunities to take baths, we thought 
sadly. They surely had toothbrushes and 
clothesbrushes, mattresses—a separate one for 
each of them—and monthly mail bringing 
them news of the whereabouts of their rela- 
tives, or at least of whether they were still 
alive or not. We had lost all that a long time 
ago. 

And how we envied those of us who had 
the opportunity to get into a factory and work 
in a sheltered room! It was everyone’s wish to 
have such a lifesaving piece of luck. The scale 


of relative luck extends even further. Even 


72 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


among those detachments outside the camp 
(in one of which I was a member) there were 
some units which were considered worse than 
others. One could envy a man who did not 
have to wade in deep, muddy clay on a steep 
slope emptying the tubs of a small field rail- 
way for twelve hours daily. Most of the daily 
accidents occurred on this job, and they were 
often fatal. 

In other work parties the foremen main- 
tained an apparently local tradition of dealing 
out numerous blows, which made us talk of 
the relative luck of not being under their com- 
mand, or perhaps of being under it only tem- 
porarily. Once, by an unlucky chance, I got 
into such a group. If an air raid alarm had not 
interrupted us after two hours (during which 
time the foreman had worked on me especial- 
ly), making it necessary to regroup the work- 
ers afterwards, I think that I would have re- 
turned to camp on one of the sledges which 
carried those who had died or were dying 
from exhaustion. No one can imagine the re- 
lief that the siren can bring in such a situation; 
not even a boxer who has heard the bell sig- 


73 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


nifying the finish of a round and who is thus 
saved at the last minute from the danger of a 
knockout. 

We were grateful for the smallest of mer- 
cies. We were glad when there was time to 
delouse before going to bed, although in itself 
this was no pleasure, as it meant standing 
naked in an unheated hut where icicles hung 
from the ceiling. But we were thankful if 
there was no air raid alarm during this opera- 
tion and the lights were not switched off. If 
we could not do the job properly, we were 
kept awake half the night. 

The meager pleasures of camp life provided 
a kind of negative happiness—“freedom from 
suffering,” as Schopenhauer put it—and even 
that in a relative way only. Real positive pleas- 
ures, even small ones, were very few. I remem- 
ber drawing up a kind of balance sheet of 
pleasures one day and finding that in many, 
many past weeks I had experienced only two 
pleasurable moments. One occurred when, on 
returning from work, I was admitted to the 
cook house after a long wait and was assigned 


to the line filing up to prisoner-cook F—— . He 
74 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


stood behind one of the huge pans and ladled 
soup into the bowls which were held out to 
him by the prisoners, who hurriedly filed past. 
He was the only cook who did not look at the 
men whose bowls he was filling; the only cook 
who dealt out the soup equally, regardless of 
recipient, and who did not make favorites of 
his personal friends or countrymen, picking 
out the potatoes for them, while the others got 
watery soup skimmed from the top. 

But it is not for me to pass judgment on 
those prisoners who put their own people 
above everyone else. Who can throw a stone 
at a man who favors his friends under circum- 
stances when, sooner or later, it is a question 
of life or death? No man should judge unless 
he asks himself in absolute honesty whether in 
a similar situation he might not have done the 
same. 


Long after I had resumed normal life again 
(that means a long time after my release from 
camp), somebody showed me an illustrated 
weekly with photographs of prisoners lying 


crowded on their bunks, staring dully at a 
75 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


visitor. “Isn’t this terrible, the dreadful staring 
faces—everything about it.” 

“Why?” I asked, for I genuinely did not 
understand. For at that moment I saw it all 
again: at 5:00 A.M. it was still pitch dark out- 
side. I was lying on the hard boards in an 
earthen hut where about seventy of us were 
“taken care of.” We were sick and did not 
have to leave camp for work; we did not have 
to go on parade. We could lie all day in our 
little corner in the hut and doze and wait for 
the daily distribution of bread (which, of 
course, was reduced for the sick) and for the 
daily helping of soup (watered down and also 
decreased in quantity). But how content we 
were; happy in spite of everything. While we 
cowered against each other to avoid any un- 
necessary loss of warmth, and were too lazy 
and disinterested to move a finger unneces- 
sarily, we heard shrill whistles and shouts from 
the square where the night shift had just re- 
turned and was assembling for roll call. The 
door was flung open, and the snowstorm blew 
into our hut. An exhausted comrade, covered 


with snow, stumbled inside to sit down for a 
76 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


few minutes. But the senior warden turned 
him out again. It was strictly forbidden to ad- 
mit a stranger to a hut while a check-up on the 
men was in progress. How sorry I was for that 
fellow and how glad not to be in his skin at 
that moment, but instead to be sick and able 
to doze on in the sick quarters! What a life- 
saver it was to have two days there, and per- 
haps even two extra days after those! 

All this came to my mind when I saw the 
photographs in the magazine. When I ex- 
plained, my listeners understood why I[ did not 
find the photograph so terrible: the people in 
it might not have been so unhappy after all. 

On my fourth day in the sick quarters I had 
just been detailed to the night shift when the 
chief doctor rushed in and asked me to volun- 
teer for medical duties in another camp con- 
taining typhus patients. Against the urgent ad- 
vice of my friends (and despite the fact that 
almost none of my colleagues offered their 
services), I decided to volunteer. I knew that 
in a working party I would die in a short time. 
But if I had to die there might at least be some 


sense in my death. J thought that it would 
77 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


doubtless be more to the purpose to try and 
help my comrades as a doctor than to vegetate 
or finally lose my life as the unproductive la- 
borer that I was then. 

For me this was simple mathematics, not 
sacrifice. But secretly, the warrant officer from 
the sanitation squad had ordered that the two 
doctors who had volunteered for the typhus 
camp should be “‘taken care of” till they left. 
We looked so weak that he feared that he 
might have two additional corpses on _ his 
hands, rather than two doctors. 


I mentioned earlier how everything that was 
not connected with the immediate task of 
keeping oneself and one’s closest friends alive 
lost its value. Everything was sacrificed to this 
end. A man’s character became involved to the 
point that he was caught in a mental turmoil 
which threatened all the values he held and 
threw them into doubt. Under the influence 
of a world which no longer recognized the 


value of human life and human dignity, which 
had robbed man of his will and had made him 


an object to be exterminated (having planned, 


78 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


however, to make full use of him first—to the 
last ounce of his physical resources) —under 
this influence the personal ego finally suffered 
a loss of values. If the man in the concentra- 
tion camp did not struggle against this in a last 
effort to save his self-respect, he lost the teel- 
ing of being an individual, a being with a mind, 
-with inner freedom and personal value. He 
thought of himself then as only a part of an 
,enormous mass of people; his existence de- 
.scended to the level of animal life. The men 
-were herded—sometimes to one place then to 
.another; sometimes driven together, then apart 
_—like a flock of sheep without a thought or a 
-will of their own. A smal] but dangerous pack 
-watched them from all sides, well versed in 
;methods of torture and sadism. They drove 
,;the herd incessantly, backwards and forwards, 
-with shouts, kicks and blows. And we, the 
«sheep, thought of two things only—how to 
,evade the bad dogs and how to get a little food. 

Just like sheep that crowd trmidly into the 
,center of a herd, each of us tried to get into 
;the middle of our formations. That gave one 


.a better chance of avoiding the blows of the 
79 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


guards who were marching on either side and 
to the front and rear of our column. The cen- 
tral position had the added advantage of af- 
fording protection against the bitter winds. It 
was, therefore, in an attempt to save one’s own 
skin that one literally tried to submerge into 
the crowd. This was done automatically in the 
formations. But at other times it was a very 
conscious effort on our part—in conformity 
with one of the camp’s most imperative laws 
of self-preservation: Do not be conspicuous. 
We tried at all times to avoid attracting the at- 
tention of the SS. 

There were times, of course, when it was 
possible, and even necessary, to keep away 
from the crowd. It is well known that an en- 
forced community life, in which attention is 
paid to everything one does at all times, may 
result in an irresistible urge to get away, at 
least for a short while. The prisoner craved to 
be aione with himself and his thoughts. He 
yearned for privacy and for solitude. After 
my transportation to a so-called “rest camp,” I 
had the rare fortune to find solitude for about 
five minutes at a time. Behind the earthen hut 


80 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


where I worked and in which were crowded 
about fifty delirious patients, there was a quiet 
spot in a corner of the double fence of barbed 
Wire surrounding the camp. A tent had been 
improvised there with a few poles and 
branches of trees in order to shelter a half- 
dozen corpses (the daily death rate in the 
camp). There was also a shaft leading to the 
water pipes. I squatted on the wooden lid of 
this shaft whenever my services were not 
needed. I just sat and looked out at the green 
flowering slopes and the distant blue hills of 
the Bavarian landscape, framed by the meshes 
of barbed wire. I dreamed longingly, and my 
thoughts wandered north and northeast, 1n the 
direction of my home, but I could only see 
clouds. 

The corpses near me, crawling with lice, did 
not bother me. Only the steps of passing 
guards could rouse me from my dreams; or 
perhaps it would be a call to the sick-bay or to 
collect a newly arrived supply of medicine 
for my hut—consisting of perhaps five or ten 
tablets of aspirin, to last for several days for 
fifty patients. I collected them and then did 


81 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
my rounds, feeling the patients’ pulses and 
giving half-tablets to the serious cases. But the 
desperately ill received no medicine. [t would 
not have helped, and besides, it would have 
deprived those for whom there was still some 
hope. For light cases, I had nothing, except 
perhaps a word of encouragement. In this way 
I dragged myself from patient to patient, 
though I myself was weak and exhausted from 
a serious attack of typhus. Then I went back 
to my lonely place on the wood cover of the 
water shaft. 

This shaft, incidentally, once saved the lives 
of three fellow prisoners. Shortly before lib- 
eration, mass transports were organized to go 
to Dachau, and these three prisoners wisely 
tried to avoid the trip. They climbed down the 
shaft and hid there from the guards. I calmly 
sat on the lid, looking innocent and playing a 
childish game of throwing pebbles at the 
barbed wire. On spotting me, the guard hesi- 


tated for a moment, but then passed on. Soon 
I could tell the three men below that the worst 
danger was over. 


82 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


It is very difficult for an outsider to grasp 
how very little value was placed on human 
life in camp. The camp inmate was hardened, 
but possibly became more conscious of this 
complete disregard of human existence when 
a convoy of sick men was arranged. The 
emaciated bodies of the sick were thrown on 
two-wheeled carts which were drawn by pris- 
oners for many miles, often through snow- 
storms, to the next camp. If one of the sick 
men had died before the cart left, he was 
thrown on anyway—the list had to be correct! 
The list was the only thing that mattered. A 
man counted only because he had a prison 
number. One literally became a number: dead 
or alive—that was unimportant; the life of a 
“number” was completely irrelevant. What 
stood behind that number and that life mat- 
tered even less: the fate, the history, the name 
of the man. In the transport of sick patients 
that I, in my capacity as a doctor, had to ac- 
company from one camp in Bavaria to an- 
other, there was a young prisoner whose 
brother was not on the list and therefore would 
have to be left behind. The young man begged 


83 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
so long that the camp warden decided to work 
an exchange, and the brother took the place of 
a man who, at the moment, preferred to stay 
behind. But the list had to be correct! That 
was easy. [he brother just exchanged numbers 
with the other prisoner. 

As I have mentioned before, we had no doc- 
uments; everyone was lucky to own his body, 
which, after all, was still breathing. All else 
about us, ie., the rags hanging from our gaunt 
skeletons, was only of interest if we were as- 
signed to a transport of sick patients. The de- 
parting “Moslems” were examined with un- 
abashed curiosity to see whether their coats or 
shoes were not better than one’s own. After 
all, their fates were sealed. But those who 
stayed behind in camp, who were still capable 
of some work, had to make use of every means 
to improve their chances of survival. They 
were not sentimental. The prisoners saw them- 
selves completely dependent on the moods of 
the guards—playthings of fate—and this made 
them even less human than the circumstances 


warranted. 
84 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


In Auschwitz I had laid down a rule for my- 
self which proved to be a good one and which 
most of my comrades later followed. I gen- 
erally answered all kinds of questions truth- 
fully. But I was silent about anything that was 
not expressly asked for. If I were asked my 
age, I gave it. If asked about my profession, | 
said “doctor,” but did not elaborate. The first 
morning in Auschwitz an SS officer came to 
the parade ground. We had to fall into sep- 
arate groups of prisoners over forty years, 
under forty years, metal workers, mechanics, 
and so forth. Then we were examined for rup- 
tures and some prisoners had to form a new 
group. [he group that I was in was driven to 
another hut, where we lined up again. After 
being sorted out once more and having an- 
swered questions as to my age and profession, 
I was sent to another small group. Once more 
we were driven to another hut and grouped 
differently. This continued for some time, and 
Y became quite unhappy, finding myself 
among strangers who spoke unintelligible for- 


eion languages. Then came the last selection, 
and I found myself back in the group that had 


85 


MAN'S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


been with me in the first hut! They had barely 
noticed that I had been sent from hut to hut 
in the meantime. But I was aware that in those 
few minutes fate had passed me in many dif- 
ferent forms. 

When the transport of sick patients for the 
“rest camp” was organized, my name (that ts, 
my number) was put on the list, since a few 
doctors were needed. But no one was con- 
vinced that the destination was really a rest 
camp. A few weeks previously the same trans- 
port had been prepared. Then, too, everyone 
had thought that it was destined for the gas 
ovens. When it was announced that anyone 
who volunteered for the dreaded night shift 
would be taken off the transport list, eighty- 
two prisoners volunteered immediately. A 
quarter of an hour later the transport was can- 
celed, but the eighty-two stayed on the list 
for the night shift. For the majority of them, 
this meant death within the next fortnight. 

Now the transport for the rest camp was 
arranged for the second time. Again no one 


knew whether this was a ruse to obtain the 
last bit of work from the sick—if only for four- 


86 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


teen days—or whether it would go to the gas 
ovens or to a genuine rest camp. The chief 
doctor, who had taken a liking to me, told me 
furtively one evening at a quarter to ten, “I 
have made it known in the orderly room that 
you can still have your name crossed off the 
list; you may do so up till ten o’clock.” 

I told him that this was not my way; that I 
had learned to let fate take its course. “I might 
as well stay with my friends,” I said. There 
was a look of pity in his eyes, as if he knew. 
. » . He shook my hand silently, as though it 
were a farewell, not for life, but from life. 
Slowly I walked back to my hut. There I 
found a good friend waiting for me. 

“You really want to go with them?” he 
asked sadly. 

“Yes, I am going.” 

Tears came to his eyes and I tried to com- 
fort him. Then there was something else to 
do—to make my will: 

“Listen, Otto, if I don’t get back home to 
my wife, and if you should see her again, then 
tell her that I talked of her daily, hourly. You 
remember. Secondly, I have loved her more 


87 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


than anyone. Thirdly, the short time I have 
been married to her outweighs everything, 
even all we have gone through here.” 

Otto, where are you now? Are you alive? 
What has happened to you since our last hour 
together? Did you find your wife again? And 
do you remember how I made you learn my 
will by heart—word for word—in spite of your 
childlike tears? 

‘The next morning I departed with the trans- 
port. This time it was not a ruse. We were not 
heading for the gas chambers, and we actually 
did go to a rest camp. Those who had pitied 
me remained in a camp where famine was to 
rage even more fiercely than in our new camp. 
They tried to save themselves, but they only 
sealed their own fates. Months later, after lib- 
eration, I met a friend from the old camp. He 
related to me how he, as camp policeman, had 
searched for a piece of human flesh that was 
missing from a pile of corpses. He confiscated 


it from a pot in which he found it cooking. 
Cannibalism had broken out. I had left just in 
time. 
Does this not bring to mind the story of 
88 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


Death in Teheran? A rich and mighty Persian 
once walked in his garden with one of his 
servants. The servant cried that he had just en- 
countered Death, who had threatened him. He 
begged his master to give him his fastest horse 
so that he could make haste and flee to 
Teheran, which he could reach that same eve- 
ning. The master consented and the servant 
galloped off on the horse. On returning to his 
house the master himself met Death, and ques- 
tioned him, “Why did you terrify and threat- 
en my servant?” “I did not threaten him; I 
only showed surprise in still finding him here 
when I planned to meet him tonight in Te- 
heran,” said Death. 


The camp inmate was frightened of making 
decisions and of taking any sort of initiative 
whatsoever. This was the result of a strong 
feeling that fate was one’s master, and that one 
must not try to influence it in any way, but in- 
stead let it take its own course. In addition, 
there was a great apathy, which contributed in 
no small part to the feelings of the prisoner. At 
times, lightning decisions had to be made, de- 


89 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
cisions which spelled life or death. The pris- 
oner would have preferred to let fate make the 
choice for him. This escape from commit- 
ment was most apparent when a prisoner had 
to make the decision for or against an escape 
attempt. In those minutes in which he had to 
make up his mind—and it was always a ques- 
tion of minutes—he suffered the tortures of 
hell. Should he make the attempt to flee? 
Should he take the risk? 

I, too, experienced this torment. As the bat- 
tle-front drew nearer, I had the opportunity to 
escape. A colleague of mine who had to visit 
huts outside the camp in the course of his med- 
ical duties wanted to escape and take me with 
him. Under the pretense of holding a consul- 
tation about a patient whose illness required a 
specialist’s advice, he smuggled me out. Out- 
side the camp, a member of a foreign resistance 
movement was to supply us with uniforms and 
documents. At the last moment there were 
some technical difficulties and we had to re- 
turn to camp once more. We used this op- 


portunity to provide ourselves with provisions 
90 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


—a few rotten potatoes—and to look for a 
rucksack, 

We broke into an empty hut of the women’s 
camp, which was vacant, as the women had 
been sent to another camp. The hut was 
in great disorder; it was obvious that many 
women had acquired supplies and fled. There 
were rags, straw, rotting food, and broken 
crockery. Some bowls were still in good con- 
dition and would have been very valuable to 
us, but we decided not to take them. We knew 
that lately, as conditions had become desper- 
ate, they had been used not only for food, but 
also as washbasins and chamber pots. (There 
was a strictly enforced rule against having any 
kind of utensil in the hut. However, some peo- 
ple were forced to break this rule, especially 
the typhus patients, who were much too weak 
to go outside even with help.) While I acted 
as a screen, my friend broke into the hut and 
returned shortly with a rucksack which he 
hid under his coat. He had seen another one 
inside which I was to take. So we changed 


places and I went in. As I searched in the rub- 
bish, finding the rucksack and even a tooth- 


91 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


brush, I suddenly saw, among all the things 
that had been left behind, the body of a 
woman. 

I ran back to my hut to collect all my pos- 
sessions: my food bowl, a pair of torn mittens 
“inherited” from a dead typhus patient, and 
a few scraps of paper covered with shorthand 
notes (on which, as I mentioned before, I had 
started to reconstruct the manuscript which I 
lost at Auschwitz). I made a quick last round 
of my patients, who were lying huddled on 
the rotten planks of wood on either side of the 
huts. I came to my only countryman, who was 
almost dying, and whose life it had been my 
ambition to save in spite of his condition. I had 
to keep my intention to escape to myself, but 
my comrade seemed to guess that something 
was wrong (perhaps I showed a little nervous- 
ness). In a tired voice he asked me, “You, too, 
are getting out?” I denied it, but I found it 
difficult to avoid his sad look. After my round 
I returned to him. Again a hopeless look greet- 
ed me and somehow I felt it to be an accusa- 
tion. The unpleasant feeling that had gripped 
me as soon as I had told my friend I would 


92 


Experiences in @ Concentration Camp 


escape with him became more intense. Sud- 
denly I decided to take fate into my own 
hands for once. I ran out of the hut and told 
my friend that I could not go with him. As 
soon as I had told him with finality that I had 
made up my mind to stay with my patients, 
the unhappy feeling left me. I did not know 
what the following days would bring, but I 
had gained an inward peace that I had never 
experienced before. I returned to the hut, sat 
down on the boards at my countryman’s feet 
and tried to comfort him; then I chatted with 
the others, trying to quiet them in their de- 
lirium. 

Our last day in camp arrived. As the battle- 
front came nearer, mass transports had taken 
nearly all the prisoners to other camps. The 
camp authorities, the Capos and the cooks had 
fled. On this day an order was given that the 
camp must be evacuated completely by sun- 
set. Even the few remaining prisoners (the 
sick, a few doctors, and some “nurses’”) would 
have to leave. At night, the camp was to be set 
on fire. In the afternoon the trucks which were 
to collect the sick had not yet appeared. In- 


93 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


stead the camp gates were suddenly closed and 
the barbed wire closely watched, so that no 
one could attempt an escape. The remaining 
prisoners seemed to be destined to burn with 
the camp. For the second time my friend and 
I decided to escape. 

We had been given an order to bury three 
men outside the barbed wire fence. We were 
the only two in camp who had strength 
enough to do the job. Nearly all the others lay 
in the few huts which were still in use, pros- 
trate with fever and delirium. We now made 
our plans: along with the first body we would 
smuggle out my friend’s rucksack, hiding it in 
the old laundry tub which served as a coffin. 
When we took out the second body we would 
also carry out my rucksack, and on the third 
trip we intended to make our escape. The first 
two trips went according to plan. After we 
returned, I waited while my friend tried to 
find a piece of bread so that we would have 
something to eat during the next few days in 
the woods. I waited. Minutes passed. I became 
more and more impatient as he did not return. 
After three years of imprisonment, I was pic- 


94 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

turing freedom joyously, imagining how won- 
derful it would be like to run toward the bat- 
tle-front. But we did not get that far. 

The very moment when my friend came 
back, the camp gate was thrown open. A 
splendid, aluminum-colored car, on which 
were painted large red crosses, slowly rolled 
on to the parade ground. A delegate from the 
International Red Cross in Geneva had ar- 
rived, and the camp and its inmates were under 
his protection. The delegate billeted himself 
in a farmhouse in the vicinity, in order to be 
near the camp at all times in case of emer- 
gency. Who worried about escape now? Boxes 
with medicines were unloaded from the car, 
cigarettes were distributed, we were photo- 
graphed and joy reigned supreme. Now there 
was no need for us to risk running toward the 
fighting line. 

In our excitement we had forgotten the 
third body, so we carried it outside and 
dropped it into the narrow grave we had dug 
for the three corpses. The guard who accom- 


panied usa relatively inoffensive man—sud- 
denly became quite gentle. He saw that the 


PS 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


tables might be turned and tried to win our 
goodwill. He joined in the short prayers that 
we offered for the dead men before throwing 
soil over them. After the tension and excite- 
ment of the past days and hours, those last 
days in our race with death, the words of our 
prayer asking for peace, were as fervent as any 
ever uttered by the human voice. 

And so the last day in camp passed in an- 
ticipation of freedom. But we had rejoiced too 
early. The Red Cross delegate had assured us 
that an agreement had been signed, and that 
the camp must not be evacuated. But that 
night the SS arrived with trucks and brought 
an order to clear the camp. The last remaining 
prisoners were to be taken to a central camp, 
from which they would be sent to Switzerland 
within forty-eight hours—to be exchanged for 
other prisoners of war. We scarcely recog- 
nized the SS. They were so friendly, trying to 
persuade us to get in the trucks without fear, 
telling us that we should be grateful for our 
good luck. Those who were strong enough 


crowded into the trucks and the seriously il 
and feeble were lifted up with difficulty. My 


96 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


friend and I-we did not hide our rucksacks 
now—stood in the last group, from which thir- 
teen would be chosen for the next to last truck. 
The chief doctor counted out the requisite 
number, but he omitted the two of us. The 
thirteen were loaded into the truck and we had 
to stay behind. Surprised, very annoyed and 
disappointed, we blamed the chief doctor, who 
excused himself by saying that he had been 
tired and distracted. He said that he had 
thought we still intended to escape. Impatient- 
ly we sat down, keeping our rucksacks on our 
backs, and waited with the few remaining 
prisoners for the last truck. We had to wait a 
long time. Finally we lay down on the mat- 
tresses of the deserted guard-room, exhausted 
by the excitement of the last few hours and 
days, during which we had fluctuated con- 
tinually between hope and despair. We slept 
im our clothes and shoes, ready for the journey. 

The noise of rifles and cannons woke us; the 


flashes of tracer bullets and gun shots entered 
the hut. The chief doctor dashed in and or- 
dered us to take cover on the floor. One pris- 
oner jumped on my stomach from the bed 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


above me with his shoes on. That awakened 
me all right! Then we grasped what was hap- 
pening: the battle-front had reached us! The 
shooting decreased and morning dawned. Out- 
side on the pole at the camp gate a white flag 
floated in the wind. 


Many weeks later we found out that even 
in those last hours fate had toyed with us few 
remaining prisoners. We found out just how 
uncertain human decisions are, especially in 
matters of life and death. I was confronted 
with photographs which had been taken in a 
small camp not far from ours. Our friends who 
had thought they were traveling to freedom 
that night had been taken in the trucks to this 
camp, and there they were locked in the huts 
and burned to death. Their partially charred 
bodies were recognizable in the photograph. I 
thought again of Death in Teheran. 


Apart from its role as a defensive mecha- 
nism, the prisoners’ apathy was also the result 
of other factors. Hunger and lack of sleep con- 
tributed to it (as they do in normal life, also) 


98 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


and to the general irritability which was an- 
other characteristic of the prisoners’ mental 
state. The lack of sleep was due partly to the 
pestering of vermin which infested the terribly 
overcrowded huts because of the general lack 
of hygiene and sanitation. The fact that we 
had neither nicotine nor caffeine also contrib- 
uted to the state of apathy and irritability. 
Besides these physical causes, there were 
mental ones, in the form of certain complexes. 
The majority of prisoners suffered from a kind 
of inferiority complex. We all had once been 
or had fancied ourselves to be “somebody.” 
Now we were treated like complete nonenti- 
ties. (The consciousness of one’s inner value is 
anchored in higher, more spiritual things, and 
cannot be shaken by camp life. But how many 
free men, let alone prisoners, possess it?) 
Without consciously thinking about it, the 
average prisoner felt himself utterly degraded. 
This became obvious when one observed the 
contrasts offered by the singular sociological 
structure of the camp. The more “prominent” 
prisoners, the Capos, the cooks, the store-keep- 
ers and the camp policemen, did not, as a rule, 


99 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


feel degraded at all, like the majority of pris- 
oners, but on the contrary—promoted! Some 
even developed miniature delusions of gran- 
deur. The mental reaction of the envious and 
grumbling majority toward this favored mi- 
nority found expression in several ways, some- 
times in jokes. For instance, I heard one pris- 
oner talk to another about a Capo, saying, 
“Imagine! I knew that man when he was only 
the president of a large bank. Isn’t it fortunate 
that he has risen so far in the world?” 
Whenever the degraded majority and the 
promoted minority came into conflict (and 
there were plenty of opportunities for this, 
starting with the distribution of food) the re- 
sults were explosive. Therefore, the general ir- 
ritability (whose physical causes were dis- 
cussed above) became most intense when these 
mental tensions were added. It is not surprising 
that this tension often ended in a general fight. 
since the prisoner continually witnessed scenes 


of beatings, the impulse toward violence was 
increased. I myself felt my fists clench when 
anger came over me while I was famished and 
tired. I was usually very tired, since we had te 


100 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

stoke our stove—which we were allowed to 
keep in our hut for the typhus patients— 
throughout the nights. However, some of the 
most idyllic hours I have ever spent were in 
the middle of the night when all the others 
were delirious or sleeping. I could lie stretched 
out in front of the stove and roast a few pil- 
fered potatoes in a fire made from stolen char- 
coal. But the following day I always felt even 
more tired, insensitive and irritable. 


While I was working as a doctor in the ty- 
phus block, I also had to take the place of the 
senior block warden, who was ill. Therefore, 
I was responsible to the camp authority for 
keeping the hut clean—if “clean” can be used 
to describe such a condition. The pretense at 
inspection to which the hut was frequently 
submitted was more for the purpose of torture 
than of hygiene. More food and a few drugs 
would have helped, but the only concern of 
the inspectors was whether a piece of straw 
was left in the center corridor, or whether the 
dirty, ragged and verminous blankets of the 


patients were tucked in neatly at their feet. As 
101 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
to the fate of the inmates, they were quite un- 
concerned. If I reported smartly, whipping my 
prison cap from my shorn head and clicking 
my heels, “Hut number VI/o: fifty-two pa- 
tients, two nursing orderlies, and one doctor,” 
they were satisfied. And then they would 
leave. But until they arrived—often they were 
hours later than announced, and sometimes did 
not come at all—I was forced to keep straight- 
ening blankets, picking up bits of straw which 
fell from the bunks, and shouting at the poor 
devils who tossed in their beds and threatened 
to upset all my efforts at tidiness and cleanli- 
ness. Apathy was particularly increased among 
the feverish patients, so that they did not react 
at all unless they were shouted at. Even this 
failed at times, and then it tock tremendous 
self-control not to strike them. For one’s own 
irritability took on enormous proportions in 
the face of the other’s apathy and especially in 
the face of the danger (i., the approaching 
inspection) which was caused by it. 


In attempting this psychological presenta- 
tion and a psychopathological explanation of 


102 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


the typical characteristics of a concentration 
camp inmate, I may give the impression that 
the human being is completely and unavoid- 
ably influenced by his surroundings. (In this 
case the surroundings being the unique struc- 
ture of camp life, which forced the prisoner 
to conform his conduct to a certain set pat- 
tern.) But what about human liberty? Is there 
no spiritual freedom in regard to behavior and 
reaction to any given surroundings? Is that 
theory true which would have us believe that 
man is no more than a product of many con- 
ditional and environmental factors -be they of 
a biological, psychological or sociological na- 
ture? Is man but an accidental product of 
these? Most important, do the prisoners’ re- 
actions to the singular world of the concentra- 
tion camp prove that man cannot escape the 
influences of his surroundings? Does man have 
no choice of action in the face of such circum- 
stances? 

We can answer these questions from ex- 
perience as well as on principle. The experi- 
ences of camp life show that man does have a 
choice of action. There were enough examples, 


103 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


often of a heroic nature, which proved that 
apathy could be overcome, irritability sup- 
pressed. Man can preserve a vestige of spiritual 
freedom, of independence of mind, even in 
such terrible conditions of psychic and physi- 
cal stress. 

We who lived in concentration camps can 
remember the men who walked through the 
huts comforting others, giving away their last 
piece of bread. They may have been few in 
number, but they offer sufficient proof that 
everything can be taken from a man but one 
thing: the last of the human freedoms-to 
choose one’s attitude in any given set of cir- 
cumstances, to choose one’s own way. 

And there were always choices to make. 
Every day, every hour, offered the opportu- 
nity to make a decision, a decision which de- 
termmed whether you would or would not 
submit to those powers which threatened to 
rob you of your very self, your inner freedom; 
which determined whether or not you would 
become the plaything of circumstance, re- 
nouncing freedom and dignity to become 
molded into the form of the typical inmate. 


104 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


Seen from this point of view, the mental re- 
actions of the inmates of a concentration camp 
must seem more to us than the mere expres- 
sion of certain physical and sociological con- 
ditions. Even though conditions such as lack of 
sleep, insufficient food and various mental 
stresses may suggest that the inmates were 
bound te react in certain ways, in the final 
analysis it becomes clear that the sort of per- 
son the prisoner became was the result of an 
inner decision, and net the result of camp in- 
fluences alone. Fundamentaily, therefore, any 
man can, even under such circumstances, de- 
cide what shall become of him—mentally and 
spiritually. He may retain his human dignity 
even in a concentration camp. Dostoevski said 
once, “There is only one thing that I dread: 
not to be worthy of my sufferings.” These 
words frequently came to my mind after I be- 
came acquainted with those martyrs whose be- 
havior in camp, whose suffering and death, 
bore witness to the fact that the last inner free- 
dom cannot be lost. It can be said that they 
were worthy of their suiferings; the way they 
bore their suffering was a genuine inner 


105 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


achievement. It is this spiritual freedom—which 
cannot be taken away—that makes life mean- 
ingful and purposeful. 

An active life serves the purpose of giving 
man the opportunity to realize values in crea- 
tive work, while a passive life of enjoyment 
affords him the opportunity to obtain fulfill- 
ment in experiencing beauty, art, or nature. 
But there is also purpose in that life which 1s 
almost barren of both creation and enjoyment 
and which admits of but one possibility of 
high moral behavior: namely, in man’s attitude 
to his existence, an existence restricted by ex- 
ternal forces. A creative life and a life of en- 
joyment are banned to him. But not only cre- 
ativeness and enjoyment are meaningful. If 
there is a meaning in life at all, then there must 
be a meaning in suffering. Suffering is an in- 
eradicable part of life, even as fate and death. 
Without suffering and death human life can- 
not be complete. 

The way in which a man accepts his fate 
and all the suffering it entails, the way in which 
he takes up his cross, gives him ample oppor- 
tunity—even under the most difficult circum- 


106 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


stances—to add a deeper meaning to his life. It 
may remain brave, dignified and unselfish. Or 
in the bitter fight for self-preservation he may 
forget his human dignity and become no more 
than an animal. Here lies the chance for a man 
either to make use of or to forego the oppor- 
tunities of attaining the moral values that a dif- 
ficult situation may afford him. And this de- 
cides whether he is worthy of his sufferings or 
not. 

Do not think that these considerations are 
unworldly and too far removed from real life. 
It is true that only a few people are capable of 
reaching such high moral standards. Of the 
prisoners only a few kept their full inner lib- 
erty and obtained those values which their suf- 
fering afforded, but even one such example is 
sufficient proof that man’s inner strength may 
raise him above his outward fate. Such men 
are not only in concentration camps. Every- 
where man is confronted with fate, with the 
chance of achieving something through his 
own suffering. 

Take the fate of the sick—especially those 
who are incurable. I once read a letter written 


107 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
by a young invalid, in which he told a friend 
that he had just found out he would not live 
for long, that even an operation would be of 
no help. He wrote further that he remembered 
a film he had seen in which a man was por- 
trayed who waited for death in a courageous 
and dignified way. The boy had thought it a 
great accomplishment to meet death so well. 
Now-—he wrote—fate was offering him a sim- 
ilar chance. 

Those of us who saw the film called Resur- 
rection—taken from a book by Tolstoy—years 
ago, may have had similar thoughts. Here were 
great destinies and great men. For us, at that 
time, there was no great fate; there was no 
chance to achieve such greatness. After the 
picture we went to the nearest café, and over 
a cup of coffee and a sandwich we forgot the 
strange metaphysical thoughts which for one 
moment had crossed our minds. But when we 
ourselves were confronted with a great destiny 
and faced with the decision of meeting it with 
equal spiritual greatness, by then we had for- 
gotten our youthful resolutions of long ago, 
and we failed. 


108 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


Perhaps there came a day for some of us 
when we saw the same film again, or a similar 
one. But by then other pictures may have 
simultaneously unrolled before one’s imner 
eye; pictures of people who attained much 
more in their lives than a sentimental film 
could show. Some details of a particular man’s 
inner greatness may have come to one’s mind, 
like the story of the young woman whose 
death I witnessed in a concentration camp. It 
is a simple story. There is little to tell and it 
may sound as it I had invented it; but to me it 
seems like a poem. 

This young woman knew that she would 
die in the next few days. But when I talked to 
her she was cheerful in spite of this knowledge. 
“I am grateful that fate has hit me so hard,” 
she told me. “In my former life I was spoiled 
and did not take spiritual accomplishments 
seriously.” Pointing through the window of 
the hut, she said, “This tree here is the only 
friend I have in my loneliness.” Through that 
window she could see just one branch of a 
chestnut tree, and on the branch were two 
blossoms. “I often talk to this tree,” she said 


109 


MAN'S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


to me. I was startled and didn’t quite know 
how to take her words. Was she delirious? 
Did she have occasional hallucinations? Anx- 
iously I asked her if the tree replied. “Yes.” 
What did it say to her? She answered, “It said 


to me, ‘I am here—I am here—I am life, eternal 
life.’ ” 


We have stated that that which was ulti- 
mately responsible for the state of the prison- 
er’s inner self was not so much the enumerated 
psychophysical causes as it was the result of a 
free decision. Psychological observations of 
the prisoners have shown that only the men 
who allowed their inner hold on their moral 
and spiritual selves to subside eventually fell 
victim to the camp’s degenerating influences. 
The question now arises, what could, or 
should, have constituted this “inner hold’? 

Former prisoners, when writing or relating 
their experiences, agree that the most depress- 
ing influence of all was that a prisoner could 
not know how long his term of imprisonment 
would be. He had been given no date for his 
release. (In our camp it was pointless even to 


110 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


talk about it.) Actually a prison term was not 
only uncertain but unlimited. A well-known 
research psychologist has pointed out that life 
in a concentration camp could be called a 
“provisional existence.” We can add to this by 
defining it as a “provisional existence of un- 
known limit.” 

New arrivals usually knew nothing about 
the conditions at a camp. Those who had come 
back from other camps were obliged to keep 
silent, and from some camps no one had re- 
turned. On entering camp a change took place 
in the minds of the men. With the end of un- 
certainty there came the uncertainty of the 
end. It was impossible to foresee whether or 
when, if at all, this form of existence would 
end. 

The Latin word finis has two meanings: the 
end or the finish, and a goal to reach. A man 
who could not see the end of his “provisional 
existence” was not able to aim at an ultimate 
goal in life. He ceased living for the future, 
in contrast to a man in normal life. Therefore 
the whole structure of his inner life changed; 


signs of decay set in which we know from 
111 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
other areas of life. The unemployed worker, 
for example, is in a similar position. His exist- 
ence has become provisional and in a certain 
sense he cannot live for the future or aim at a 
goal. Research work done on unemployed 
miners has shown that they suffer from a pecul- 
lar sort of deformed time-—inner time—which 
is a result of their unemployed state. Prisoners, 
too, suffered from this strange “time-experi- 
ence.” In camp, a small time unit, a day, for 
example, filled with hourly tortures and fa- 
tigue, appeared endless. A larger time umut, 
perhaps a week, seemed to pass very quickly. 
My comrades agreed when I said that in camp 
a day lasted longer than a week. How para- 
doxical was our time-experience! In this con- 
nection one is reminded of Thomas Mann’s 
The Magic Mountain, which contains some 
very pointed psychological remarks. Mann 
studies the spiritual development of people 
who are in an analogous psychological post- 
tion, i.e., tuberculosis patients in a sanator1um 
who also know no date for their release. They 
experience a similar existence—without a fu- 


ture and without a goal. 


112 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


One of the prisoners, who on his arrival 
marched with a long column of new inmates 
from the station to the camp, told me later 
that he had felt as though he were marching 
at his own funeral. His life had seemed to him 
absolutely without future. He regarded it as 
over and done, as if he had already died. This 
feeling of lifelessness was intensified by other 
causes: in time, it was the limitlessness of the 
term of imprisonment which was most acutely 
felt; in space, the narrow limits of the prison. 
Anything outside the barbed wire became re- 
mote—out of reach and, in a way, unreal. The 
events and the people outside, all the normal 
life there, had a ghostly aspect for the prisoner. 
The outside life, that is, as much as he could 
see of it, appeared to him almost as it might 
have to a dead man who looked at it from an- 
other world. 

A man who let himself decline because he 
could not see any future goal found himself 
occupied with retrospective thoughts. In a dif- 
ferent connection, we have already spoken of 
the tendency there was to look into the past, 
to help make the present, with all its horrors, 


113 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
less real. But in robbing the present of its re- 
ality there lay a certain danger. It became easy 
to overlook the opportunities to make some- 
thing positive of camp life, opportunities 
which really did exist. Regarding our “pro- 
visional existence” as unreal was in itself an 
important factor in causing the prisoners to 
lose their hold on life; everything in a way be- 
came pointless, Such people forgot that often 
it is just such an exceptionally difficult ex- 
ternal situation which gives man the oppor- 
tunity to grow spiritually beyond himself. In- 
stead of taking the camp’s difficulties as a test 
of their inner strength, they did not take their 
life seriously and despised it as something of 
no consequence. They preferred to close their 
eyes and to live in the past. Life for such peo- 
ple became meaningless. 

Naturally only a few people were capable 
of reaching great spiritual heights. But a few 
were given the chance to attain human great- 
ness even through their apparent worldly fail- 
ure and death, an accomplishment which in 
ordinary circumstances they would never have 
achieved. To the others of us, the mediocre 


114 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


and the half-hearted, the words of Bismarck 
could be applied: “Life is like being at the 
dentist. You always think that the worst is still 
to come, and yet it is over already.” Varying 
this, we could say that most men in a concen- 
tration camp believed that the real opportuni- 
ties of life had passed. Yet, in reality, there 
was an opportunity and a challenge. One 
could make a victory of those experiences, 
turning life into an inner triumph, or one 
could ignore the challenge and simply vege- 
tate, as did a majority of the prisoners. 


Any attempt at fighting the camp’s psycho- 
pathological influence on the prisoner by psy- 
chotherapeutic or psychohygienic methods 
had to aim at giving him inner strength by 
pointing out to him a future goal to which he 
could look forward. Instinctively some of the 
prisoners attempted to find one on their own. 
It is a peculiarity of man that he can only live 
by looking to the future—sub specie aeterni- 
tatis. And this is his salvation in the most diffi- 
cult moments of his existence, although he 
sometimes has to force his mind to the task. 


115 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 

I remember a personal experience. Almost 
in tears from pain (I had terrible sores on my 
feet from wearing torn shoes), I limped a few 
kilometers with our long column of men from 
the camp to our work site. Very cold, bitter 
winds struck us. I kept thinking of the endless 
little problems of our miserable life. What 
would there be to eat tonight? If a piece of 
sausage came as extra ration, should I exchange 
it for a piece of bread? Should I trade my last 
cigarette, which was left from a bonus I re- 
ceived a fortnight ago, for a bowl of soup? 
How could I get a piece of wire to replace 
the fragment which served as one of my shoe- 
laces? Would I get to our work site in time 
to jor my usual working party or would I 
have to join another, which might have a bru- 
tal foreman? What could I do to get on good 
terms with the Capo, who could help me to 
obtain work in camp instead of undertaking 
this horribly long daily march? 

I became disgusted with the state of affairs 
which compelled me, daily and hourly, to 
think of only such trivial things. I forced my 
thoughts to turn to another subject. Suddenly 


116 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


I saw myself standing on the platform of a 
well-lit, warm and pleasant lecture room. In 
front of me sat an attentive audience on com- 
fortable upholstered seats. I was giving a lec- 
ture on the psychology of the concentration 
camp! All that oppressed me at that moment 
became objective, seen and described from the 
remote viewpoint of science. By this method 
I succeeded somehow in rising above the situa- 
tion, above the sufferings of the moment, and 
I observed them as if they were already of 
the past. Both I and my troubles became the 
object of an interesting psychoscientific study 
undertaken by myself. What does Spinoza say 
in his Etbics?—“Affectus, qui passio est, desinit 
esse passio simulatque etus claram et distinctam 
formamus ideam.” Emotion, which is sufter- 
ing, ceases to be suffering as soon as we form 
a clear and precise picture of it. 


The prisoner who had lost faith in the fu- 
ture—his future—was doomed. With his loss 
of belief in the future, he also lost his spiritual 
hold; he let himself decline and became subject 
to mental and physical decay. Usually this 


LI7 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


happened quite suddenly, in the form of a 
crisis, the symptoms of which were familiar 
to the experienced camp inmate. We all feared 
this moment—not for ourselves, which would 
have been pointless, but for our friends. Usual- 
ly it began with the prisoner refusing one 
morning to get dressed and wash or to go out 
on the parade grounds. No entreaties, no 
blows, no threats had any effect. He just lay 
there, hardly moving. If this crisis was brought 
about by an illness, he refused to be taken to 
the sick-bay or to do anything to help himself. 
He simply gave up. There he remained, lying 
in his own excreta, and nothing bothered him 
any more. 

I once had a dramatic demonstration of the 
close link between the loss of faith in the fu- 
ture and this dangerous giving up. F——, my 
senor block warden, a fairly well-known com- 
poser and librettist, confided in me one day: 
“I would like to tell you something, Doctor. 
I have had a strange dream. A voice told me 
that I could wish for something, that I should 
only say what I wanted to know, and all my 
questions would be answered. What do you 


118 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


think {I asked? That I would like to know 
when the war would be over for me. You 
know what I mean, Doctor—for me! I want- 
ed to know when we, when our camp, would 
be liberated and our sufferings come to an 
end.” 

“And when did you bave this dream?” I 
asked. 

“In February, ro4s,” he answered. It was 
then the beginning of March. 

“What did your dream voice answer?” 

Fartively he whispered to me, “March thir- 
tieth,” 

When F-— told me about his dream, he 
was still full of hope and convinced that the 
voice of his dream would be right. But as the 
promised day drew nearer, the war news 
which reached our camp made it appear very 
unlikely that we would be free on the promised 
date. On March twenty-ninth, F—— suddenly 
became ill and ran a high temperature. On 
March thirtieth, the day his prophecy had 
told him that the war and suffering would be 
over for him, he became delirious and lost 
consciousness. On March thirty-first, he was 


119 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


dead. To all outward appearances, he had died 
of typhus. 


Those who know how close the connection 
is between the state of mind of a man—his 
courage and hope, or lack of them—and the 
state of immunity of his body will understand 
that the sudden loss of hope and courage can 
have a deadly effect. The ultimate cause of my 
friend’s death was that the expected liber- 
ation did not come and he was severely disap- 
pointed. This suddenly lowered his body’s re- 
sistance against the latent typhus infection. His 
faith in the future and his will to live had be- 
come paralyzed and his body fell victim to il- 
ness—and thus the voice of his dream was right 
after all. 

The observations of this one case and the 
conclusion drawn from them are in accord- 
ance with something that was drawn to my at- 
tention by the chief doctor of our concentra- 
tion camp. The death rate in the week be- 
tween Christmas, 1944, and New Year’s, 1945, 
increased in camp beyond all previous experi- 


ence. In his opinion, the explanation for this 
120 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


increase did not lie in the harder working con- 
ditions or the deterioration of our food sup- 
plies or a change of weather or new epidemics. 
It was simply that the majority of the prison- 
ers had lived in the naive hope that they would 
be home again by Christmas. As the time drew 
near and there was no encouraging news, the 
prisoners lost courage and disappointment 
overcame them. This had a dangerous influ- 
ence on their powers of resistance and a great 
number of them died. 

As we said before, any attempt to restore a 
man’s inner strength in the camp had first to 
succeed in showing him some future goal. 
Nietzsche’s words, “He who has a why to live 
for can bear with almost any bow,” could be 
the guiding motto for all psychotherapeutic 
and psychohygienic efforts regarding prison- 
ers. Whenever there was an opportunity for 
it, one had to give them a why—an aim—for 
their lives, in order to strengthen them to bear 
the terrible how of their existence:-Woe to 
him who saw no more sense in his life, no aim, 
no purpose, and therefore no point in carrying 
on. He was soon lost. The typical reply with 


121 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
which such a man rejected all encouraging 
arguments was, “I have nothing to expect from 
life any more.” What sort of answer can one 
give to that? 

What was really needed was a fundamental 
change in our attitude toward life. We had to 
learn ourselves and, furthermore, we had to 
teach the despairing men, that it did not really 
matter what we expected from life, but rather 
what life expected from us. We needed to stop 
asking about the meaning of life, and instead 
to think of ourselves as those who were being 
questioned by life—daily and hourly. Our an- 
swer must consist, not in talk and meditation, 
but in right action and in right conduct. Life 
ultimately means taking the responsibility to 
find the right answer to its problems and to 
fulfill the tasks which it constantly sets for 
each individual. 

These tasks, and therefore the meaning of 
life, differ from man to man, and from mo- 
ment to moment. Thus it is impossible to de- 
fine the meaning of life in a general way. 
Questions about the meaning of life can never 
be answered by sweeping statements. “Life” 


122 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

does not mean something vague, but some- 
thing very real and concrete, just as life’s tasks 
are also very real and concrete. They form 
man’s destiny, which is different and unique 
for each individual. No man and no destiny 
can be compared with any other man or any 
other destiny. No situation repeats itself, and 
each situation calls for a different response. 
Sometimes the situation in which a man finds 
himself may require him to shape his own fate 
by action. At other times it is more advanta- 
geous for him to make use of an opportunity 
for contemplation and to realize assets in this 
way. Sometimes man may be required simply 
to accept fate, to bear his cross. Every situation 
is distinguished by its uniqueness, and there is 
always only one right answer to the problem 
posed by the situation at hand. 

When a man finds that it is his destiny to 
suffer, he will have to accept his suffering as 
his task; his single and unique task. He will 
have to acknowledge the fact that even in suf- 
fering he is unique and alone in the universe. 


No one can relieve him of his suffering or suf- 


123 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
fer in his place. His unique opportunity lies in 
the way in which he bears his burden. 

For us, as prisoners, these thoughts were not 
speculations far removed from reality. They 
were the only thoughts that could be of help 
to us. They kept us from despair, even when 
there seemed to be no chance of coming out of 
it alive. Long ago we had passed the stage of 
asking what was the meaning of life, a naive 
query which understands life as the attaining 
of some aim through the active creation of 
something of value. For us, the meaning of 
life embraced the wider cycles of life and 
death, of suffering and of dying. 

Once the meaning of suffering had been re~ 
vealed to us, we refused to minimize or allevi-: 
ate the camp’s tortures by ignoring them or 
harboring false illusions and entertaining arti- 
ficial optimism. Suffering had become a task 
on which we did not want to turn our backs. 
We had realized its hidden opportunities for 
achievement, the opportunities which caused 
the poet Rilke to write, “Wie viel ist aufzu- 
leiden!” (How much suffering there is to get 
through!) Rilke spoke of “getting through 


124 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


suffering” as others would talk of “getting 
through work.” There was plenty of suffering 
for us to get through. Therefore, it was neces- 
sary to face up to the full amount of suffering, 
trying to keep moments of weakness and fur- 
tive tears to a minimum. But there was no need 
to be ashamed of tears, for tears bore witness 
that a man had the greatest of courage, the 
courage to suffer. Only very few realized that. 
Shamefacedly some confessed occasionally 
that they had wept, like the comrade who an- 
swered my question of how he had gotten 
over his edema, by confessing, “I have wept it 
out of my system.” 


The tender beginnings of a psychotherapy 
or psychohygiene were, when they were pos- 
sible at all in the camp, either individual or 
collective in nature. The individual psycho- 
therapeutic attempts were often a kind of “‘life- 
saving procedure.” These efforts were usually 
concerned with the prevention of suicides. A 
very strict camp ruling forbade any efforts to 
save a man who attempted suicide. It was for- 
bidden, for example, to cut down a man who 


125 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


was trying to hang himself. Therefore, it was 
all important to prevent these attempts from 
occurring. 

I remember two cases of would-be suicide, 
which bore a striking similarity to each other. 
Both men had talked of their intentions to 
commit suicide. Both used the typical argu- 
ment—they had nothing more to expect from 
life. In both cases it was a question of getting 
them to realize that life was still expecting 
something from them; something in the fu- 
ture was expected of them. We found, in fact, 
that for the one it was his child whom he 
adored and who was waiting for him in a for- 
eign country. For the other it was a thing, not 
a person. This man was a scientist and had 
written a series of books which still needed to 
be finished. His work could not be done by 
anyone else, any more than another person 
could ever take the place of the father in his 
child’s affections. 

This uniqueness and singleness which distin- 
guishes each individual and gives a meaning to 
his existence has a bearing on creative work as 
much as it does on human love. When the im- 


126 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

possibility of replacing a person is realized, it 
allows the responsibility which a man has for 
his existence and its continuance to appear in 
all its magnitude. A man who becomes con- 
scious of the responsibility he bears toward a 
human being who affectionately waits for him, 
or to an unfinished work, will never be able to 
throw away his life. He knows the “why” for 
his existence, and will be able to bear almost 
any “how.” 


The opportunities for collective psycho- 
therapy were naturally limited in camp. The 
right example was more effective than words 
could ever be. A senior block warden who did 
not side with the authorities had, by his just 
and encouraging behavior, a thousand oppor- 
tunities to exert a far-reaching moral influence 
on those under his jurisdiction. The immediate 
influence of behavior is always more effective 
than that of words. But at times a word was 
effective too, when mental receptiveness had 
been intensified by some outer circumstances. 


I remember an incident when there was occa- 
sion for psychotherapeutic work on the in- 


127 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
mates of a whole hut, due to an intensification 
of their receptiveness because of a certain ex- 
ternal situation. 

It had been a bad day. On parade, an an- 
nouncement had been made about the many 
actions that would, from then on, be regarded 
as sabotage and therefore punishable by im- 
mediate death by hanging. Among these were 
crimes such as cutting small strips from our 
old blankets (in order to improvise ankle sup- 
ports) and very minor “thefts.” A few days 
previously a semi-starved prisoner had broken 
into the potato store to steal a few pounds of 
potatoes. The theft had been discovered and 
some prisoners had recognized the “burglar.” 
When the camp authorities heard about it 
they ordered that the guilty man be given up 
to them or the whole camp would starve for a 
day. Naturally the 2,500 men preferred to 
fast. 

On the evening of this day of fasting we 
lay in our earthen huts—in a very low mood. 
Very little was said and every word sounded 
irritable. Then, to make matters even worse, 
the light went out. Tempers reached their 


128 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


lowest ebb. But our senior block warden was 
a wise man. He improvised a little talk about 
all that was on our minds at that moment. He 
talked about the many comrades who had died 
in the last few days, either of sickness or of 
suicide. But he also mentioned what may have 
been the real reason for their deaths: giving up 
hope. He maintained that there should be some 
way of preventing possible future victims 
from reaching this extreme state. And it was to 
me that the warden pointed to give this advice. 

God knows, I was not in the mood to give 
psychological explanations or to preach any 
sermons—to offer my comrades a kind of med- 
ical care of their souls. I was cold and hungry, 
irritable and tired, but I had to make the ef- 
fort and use this unique opportunity. En- 
couragement was now more necessary than 
ever. 

So I began by mentioning the most trivial of 
comforts first. I said that even in this Europe 
in the sixth winter of the Second World War, 
our situation was not the most terrible we 
could think of. I said that each of us had to ask 
himself what irreplaceable losses he had suf- 


129 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
fered up to then. I speculated that for most of 
them these losses had really been few. Who- 
ever was still alive had reason for hope. 
Health, family, happiness, professional abili- 
ties, fortune, position in society—all these were 
things that could be achieved again or re- 
stored. After all, we still had all our bones in- 
tact. Whatever we had gone through could 
still be an asset to us in the future. And I 
quoted from Nietzsche: “Was mich nicht um- 
bringt, macht mich stérker.’ (That which 
does not kill me, makes me stronger. ) 

Then I spoke about the future. I said that to 
the impartial the future must seem hopeless. I 
agreed that each of us could guess for himself 
how small were his chances of survival. I told 
them that although there was still no typhus 
epidemic in the camp, I estimated my own 
chances at about one in twenty. But I also told 
them that, in spite of this, I had no intention of 
losing hope and giving up. For no man knew 
what the future would bring, much less the 
next hour. Even if we could not expect any 
sensational military events in the next few 


days, who knew better than we, with our ex- 
130 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


perience of camps, how great chances some- 
times opened up, quite suddenly, at least for 
the individual. For instance, one might be at- 
tached unexpectedly to a special group with 
exceptionally good working conditions—for 
this was the kind of thing which constituted 
the “luck” of the prisoner. 

But I did not only talk of the future and the 
veil which was drawn over it. I also mentioned 
the past; all its joys, and how its light shone 
even in the present darkness. Again I quoted a 
poet—to avoid sounding like a preacher my- 
self—who had written, “Was Du erlebt, kann 
keine Macht der Welt Dir rauben.” (What 
you have experienced, no power on earth can 
take from you.) Not only our experiences, but 
all we have done, whatever great thoughts we 
may have had, and all we have suffered, all 
this is not lost, though it is past; we have 
brought it into being. Having been is also a 
kind of being, and perhaps the surest kind. 

Then I spoke of the many opportunities of 
giving life a meaning. I told my comrades 
(who lay motionless, although occasionally a 
sigh could be heard) that human life, under 


131 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
any circumstances, never ceases to have a 
meaning, and that this infinite meaning of life 
includes suffering and dying, privation and 
death. I asked the poor creatures who listened 
to me attentively in the darkness of the hut to 
face up to the seriousness of our position. 
They must not lose hope but should keep their 
courage in the certainty that the hopelessness 
of our struggle did not detract from its dig- 
nity and its meaning. I said that someone looks 
down on each of us in difficult hours—a friend, 
a wife, somebody alive or dead, or a God—and 
he would not expect us to disappoint him. He 
would hope to find us suffering proudly—not 
miserably—knowing how to die. 

And finally I spoke of our sacrifice, which 
had meaning in every case. It was in the na- 
ture of this sacrifice that it should appear to be 
pointless in the normal world, the world of 
material success. But in reality our sacrifice did 
have a meaning. Those of us who had any re- 
ligious faith, I said frankly, could understand 
without difficulty. I told them of a comrade 


who on his arrival in camp had tried to make 
132 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

a pact with Heaven that his suffering and 
death should save the human being he loved 
from a painful end. For this man, suffering and 
death were meaningful; his was a sacrifice of 
the deepest significance. He did not want to 
die for nothing. None of us wanted that. 

The purpose of my words was to find a 
full meaning in our life, then and there, in 
that hut and in that practically hopeless situ- 
ation. I saw that my efforts had been success- 
ful. When the electric bulb flared up again, I 
saw the miserable figures of my friends limp- 
ing toward me to thank me with tears in their 
eyes. But I have to confess here that only too 
rarely had I the inner strength to make contact 
with my companions in suffering and that I 
must have missed many opportunities for do- 


ing so. 


We now come to the third stage of a prison- 
er’s mental reactions: the psychology of the 
prisoner after his liberation. But prior to that 


we shall consider a question which the psy- 


chologist is asked frequently, especially when 
133 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


he has personal knowledge of these matters: 
What can you tell us about the psychological 
make-up of the camp guards? How is it pos- 
sible that men of flesh and blood could treat 
others as so many prisoners say they have 
been treated? Having once heard these ac- 
counts and having come to believe that these 
things did happen, one is bound to ask how, 
psychologically, they could happen. To an- 
swer this question without going into great 
detail, a few things must be pointed out: 

First, among the guards there were some 
sadists, sadists in the purest clinical sense. 

Second, these sadists were always selected 
when a really severe detachment of guards 
was needed. 

There was great joy at our work site when 
we had permission to warm ourselves for a 
few minutes (after two hours of work in the 
bitter frost) in front of a little stove which 
was fed with twigs and scraps of wood. But 
there were always some foremen who found 
a great pleasure in taking this comfort from 
us. How clearly their faces reflected this 


pleasure when they not only forbade us to 
134 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 

stand there but turned over the stove and 
dumped its lovely fire into the snow! When 
the SS took a dislike to a person, there was 
always some special man in their ranks known 
to have a passion for, and to be highly special- 
ized in, sadistic torture, to whom the unfor- 
tunate prisoner was sent. 

Third, the feelings of the majority of the 
guards had been dulled by the number of years 
in which, in ever-increasing doses, they had 
witnessed the brutal methods of the camp. 
These morally and mentally hardened men at 
least refused to take active part in sadistic 
measures. But they did not prevent others 
from carrying them out. 

Fourth, it must be stated that even among 
the guards there were some who took pity on 
us. I shall only mention the commander of the 
camp from which I was liberated. It was found 
after the liberation—only the camp doctor, a 
prisoner himself, had known of it previously 
—that this man had paid no small sum of 


money from his own pocket in order to pur- 


chase medicines for his prisoners from the 


135 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


nearest market town.’ But the senior camp 
warden, a prisoner himself, was harder than 
any of the SS guards. He beat the other prison- 
ers at every slightest opportunity, while the 
camp commander, to my knowledge, never 
once lifted his hand against any of us. 

It is apparent that the mere knowledge that 
a man was either a camp guard or a prisoner 
tells us almost nothing. Human kindness can 
be found in all groups, even those which as 
a whole it would be easy to condemn. The 
boundaries between groups overlapped and 
we must not try to simplify matters by say- 
ing that these men were angels and those were 
devils. Certainly, it was a considerable achieve- 
ment for a guard or foreman to be kind to the 
prisoners in spite of all the camp’s influences, 


1 An interesting incident with reference to this SS commander is 
in regard to the attitude taken toward him by some of his Jewish 
prisoners. At the end of the war when the American troops liber- 
ated the prisoners from our camp, three young Hungarian Jews hid 
this commander in the Bavarian woods. Then they went to the 
commandant of the American Forces who was very eager to cap- 
ture this SS commander and they said they would tell him 
where he was but only under certain conditions: the American 
commander must promise that absolutely no harm would come to 
this man. After a while, the American officer finally promised 
these young Jews that the SS commander when taken into captivity 
would be kept safe from harm. Not only did the American officer 
keep his promise but, as a matter of fact, the former SS com- 
mander of this concentration camp was in a sense restored to his 
command. for he supervised the collection of clothing among the 
nearby Bavarian villages, and its distribution to all of us who at 
that time still wore the clothes we had inherited from other in- 
mates of Camp Auschwitz who were not as fortunate as we, having 
been sent to the gas chamber immediately upon their arrival at the 
railway station. 


136 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


and, on the other hand, the baseness of a pris- 
oner who treated his own companions badly 
was exceptionally contemptible. Obviously 
the prisoners found the lack of character in 
such men especially upsetting, while they were 
profoundly moved by the smallest kindness 
received from any of the guards. I remember 
how one day a foreman secretly gave me a 
piece of bread which I knew he must have 
saved from his breakfast ration. It was far 
more than the small piece of bread which 
moved me to tears at that time. It was the hu- 
man “something” which this man also gave 
to me—the word and look which accompanied 
the gift. 

From all this we may learn that there are 
two races of men in this world, but only these 
two—the “race” of the decent man and the 
“race” of the indecent man. Both are found 
everywhere; they penetrate into all groups of 
society. No group consists entirely of decent 
or indecent people. In this sense, no group is 
of “pure race’”—and therefore one occasionally 


found a decent fellow among the camp guards. 


Life in a concentration camp tore open the 
137 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


human soul and exposed its depths. Is it sur- 
prising that in those depths we again found 
only human qualities which in their very na- 
ture were a mixture of good and evil? The rift 
dividing good from evil, which goes through 
all human beings, reaches into the lowest 
depths and becomes apparent even on the bot- 
tom of the abyss which is laid open by the 
concentration camp. 


And now to the last chapter in the psychol- 
ogy of a concentration camp—the psychology 
of the prisoner who has been released. In de- 
scribing the experiences of liberation, which 
naturally must be personal, we shall pick up 
the threads of that part of our narrative which 
told of the morning when the white flag was 
hoisted above the camp gates, after days of 
high tension. This state of inner suspense was 
followed by total relaxation. But it would be 
quite wrong to think that we went mad with 
joy. What, then, did happen? 

With tired steps we prisoners dragged our- 
selves to the camp gates. Timidly we looked 
around and glanced at each other questioning- 


138 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


ly. Then we ventured a few steps out of camp. 
This time no orders were shouted at us, nor 
was there any need to duck quickly to avoid 
a blow or kick. Oh no! This time the guards 
offered us cigarettes! We hardly recognized 
them at first; they had hurriedly changed into 
civilian clothes. We walked slowly along the 
road leading from the camp. Soon our legs 
hurt and threatened to buckle. But we limped 
on; we wanted to see the camp’s surroundings 
for the first time with the eyes of free men. 
“Freedom’—we repeated to ourselves, and yet 
we could not grasp it. We had said this word 
so often during all the years we dreamed about 
it, that it had lost its meaning. Its reality did 
not penetrate into our consciousness; we could 
not grasp the fact that freedom was ours. 
We came to meadows full of flowers. We 
saw and realized that they were there, but we 
had no feelings about them. The first spark of 
joy came when we saw a rooster with a tail 
of multicolored feathers. But it remained only 


a spark; we did not yet belong to this world. 


In the evening when we all met again in our 


139 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
hut, one said secretly to the other, “Tell me, 
were you pleased today?” 

And the other replied, feeling ashamed as 
he did not know that we all felt similarly, 
“Truthfully, no!” We had literally lost the 
ability to feel pleased and had to relearn it 
slowly. 


Psychologically, what was happening to the 
liberated prisoners could be called “deperson- 
alization.” Everything appeared unreal, un- 
likely, as in a dream. We could not believe it 
was true. How often in the past years had 
we been deceived by dreams! We dreamt that 
the day of liberation had come, that we had 
been set free, had returned home, greeted our 
friends, embraced our wives, sat down at the 
table and started to tell of all the things we 
had gone through—even of how we had often 
seen the day of liberation in our dreams. And 
then—a whistle shrilled in our ears, the signal 
to get up, and our dreams of freedom came to 


an end. And now the dream had come true. 


But could we truly believe in it? 
140 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


The body has fewer inhibitions than the 
mind. It made good use of the new freedom 
from the first moment on. It began to eat 
ravenously, for hours and days, even half the 
night. It is amazing what quantities one can 
eat. And when one of the prisoners was in- 
vited out by a friendly farmer in the neigh- 
borhood, he ate and ate and then drank coffee, 
which loosened his tongue, and he then began 
to talk, often for hours. The pressure which 
had been on his mind for years was released at 
last. Hearing him talk, one got the impression 
that he had to talk, that his desire to speak 
was irresistible. I have known people who 
have been under heavy pressure only for a 
short time (for example, through a cross- 
examination by the Gestapo) to have similar 
reactions. Many days passed, until not only 
the tongue was loosened, but something within 
oneself as well; then feeling suddenly broke 
through the strange fetters which had re- 
strained it. 


One day, a few days after the liberation, I 
walked through the country past flowering 


141 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


meadows, for miles and miles, toward the 
market town near the camp. Larks rose to the 
sky and I could hear their joyous song. There 
was no one to be seen for miles around; there 
was nothing but the wide earth and sky and 
the larks’ jubilation and the freedom of space. 
I stopped, looked around, and up to the sky— 
and then I went down on my knees. At that 
moment there was very little I knew of myself 
or of the world—I had but one sentence in 
mind—always the same: “I called to the Lord 
from my narrow prison and He answered me 
in the freedom of space.” 

How long I knelt there and repeated this 
sentence memory can no longer recall. But I 
know that on that day, in that hour, my new 
life started. Step for step I progressed, until I 
again became a human being. 


The way that led from the acute mental 
tension of the last days in camp (from that 
war of nerves to mental peace) was certainly 
not free from obstacles. It would be an error 
to think that a liberated prisoner was not in 
need of spiritual care any more. We have to 


142 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


consider that a man who has been under such 
enormous mental pressure for such a long time 
is naturally in some danger after his liberation, 
especially since the pressure was released quite 
suddenly. This danger (in the sense of psycho- 
logical hygiene) is the psychological counter- 
part of the bends. Just as the physical health 
of the caisson worker would be endangered 
if he left his diver’s chamber suddenly (where 
he is under enormous atmospheric pressure), 
so the man who has suddenly been liberated 
from mental pressure can suffer damage to his 
moral and spiritual health. 

During this psychological phase one ob- 
served that people with natures of a more 
primitive kind could not escape the influences 
of the brutality which had surrounded them 
in camp life. Now, being free, they thought 
they could use their freedom licentiously and 
ruthlessly. The only thing that had changed 
for them was that they were now the oppres- 
sors instead of the oppressed. They became 
instigators, not objects, of willful force and 
injustice. They justified their behavior by their 


own terrible experiences. This was often re- 


143 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


vealed in apparently insignificant events. A 
friend was walking across a field with me 
toward the camp when suddenly we came to 
a field of green crops. Automatically, I avoid- 
ed it, but he drew his arm through mine and 
dragged me through it. I stammered some- 
thing about not treading down the young 
crops. He became annoyed, gave me an angry 
look and shouted, “You don’t say! And hasn’t 
enough been taken from us? My wife and 
child have been gassed—not to mention every- 
thing else—and you would forbid me to tread 
on a few stalks of oats!” 

Only slowly could these men be guided 
back to the commonplace truth that no one 
has the right to do wrong, not even if wrong 
has been done to him. We had to strive to 
lead them back to this truth, or the conse- 
quences would have been much worse than 
the loss of a few thousand stalks of oats. I can 
still see the prisoner who rolled up his shirt 
sleeves, thrust his right hand under my nose 
and shouted, “May this hand be cut off if I 
don’t stain it with blood on the day when I 
get home!” I want to emphasize that the man 


144 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 


who said these words was not a bad fellow. 
He had been the best of comrades in camp and 
afterwards. 

Apart from the moral deformity resulting 
from the sudden release of mental pressure, 
there were two other fundamental experiences 
which threatened to damage the character of 
the liberated prisoner: bitterness and disillu- 
sionment when he returned to his former life. 

Bitterness was caused by a number of things 
he came up against in his former home town. 
When, on his return, a man found that in 
many places he was met only with a shrug of 
the shoulders and with hackneyed phrases, he 
tended to become bitter and to ask himself 
why he had gone through all that he had. 
When he heard the same phrases nearly every- 
where—“We did not know about it,” and 
“We, too, have suffered,’ then he asked him- 
self, have they really nothing better to say to 
me? 

The experience of disillusionment is differ- 
ent. Here it was not one’s fellow man (whose 
superficiality and lack of feeling was so dis- 
gusting that one finally felt like creeping into 


145 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
a hole and neither hearing nor seeing human 
beings any more) but fate itself which seemed 
so cruel. A man who for years had thought he 
had reached the absolute limit of all possible 
suffering now found that suffering has no lim- 
its, and that he could suffer still more, and still 
more intensely. 

When we spoke about attempts to give a 
man in camp mental courage, we said that he 
had to be shown something to look forward 
to in the future. He had to be reminded that 
life still waited for him, that a human being 
waited for his return. But after liberation? 
There were some men who found that no one 
awaited them. Woe to him who found that 
the person whose memory alone had given 
him courage in camp did not exist any more! 
Woe to him who, when the day of his dreams 
finally came, found it so different from all he 
had longed for! Perhaps he boarded a trolley, 
traveled out to the home which he had seen 
for years in his mind, and only in his mind, 
and pressed the bell, just as he has longed to do 
in thousands of dreams, only to find that the 

146 


Experiences in a Concentration Camp 
person who should open the door was not 
there, and would never be there again. 

We all said to each other in camp that there 
could be no earthly happiness which could 
compensate for all we had suffered. We were 
not hoping for happiness—it was not that 
which gave us courage and gave meaning to 
our suffering, our sacrifices and our dying. 
And yet we were not prepared for unhappi- 
ness. This disillusionment, which awaited not 
a small number of prisoners, was an experi- 
ence which these men have found very hard 
to get over and which, for a psychiatrist, 1s 
also very difficult to help them overcome. But 
this must not be a discouragement to him; on 
the contrary, it should provide an added stim- 
ulus. 


But for every one of the liberated prisoners, 
the day comes when, looking back on his camp 
experiences, he can no longer understand how 
he endured it all. As the day of his liberation 
eventually came, when everything seemed to 


him like a beautiful dream, so also the day 


147 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


comes when all his camp experiences seem to 
him nothing but a nightmare. 

The crowning experience of all, for the 
homecoming man, is the wonderful feeling 
that, after all he has suffered, there is nothing 


he need fear any more—except his God. 


Part Tyo 


Basic Concepts 
of Logotherapy 


READERS OF MY SHORT autobiographical story 
usually ask for a fuller and more direct ex- 
planation of my therapeutic doctrine. Accord- 
ingly I added a brief section on logotherapy 
to the original edition of From Death-Camp 
to Existentialism. But that was not enough, 
and I have been besieged by requests for a 
more extended treatment. Therefore, in the 
present edition I have completely rewritten 
and considerably expanded my account. 

The assignment was not easy. To convey to 
the reader within a short space all the material 
that required fourteen volumes in German is 
an almost hopeless task. I am reminded of the 
American doctor who once turned up in my 
clinic in Vienna and asked me, ‘“‘Now, doctor, 
are you a psychoanalyst?” Whereupon I re- 


plied, “Not exactly a psychoanalyst; let’s say 
151 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


a psychotherapist.” Then he continued ques- 
tioning me: “What school do you stand for?” 
I answered, “It is my own theory; it is called 
logotherapy.” “Can you tell me in one sen- 
tence what is meant by logotherapy?” he 
asked. ‘“‘At least, what is the difference between 
psychoanalysis and logotherapy?” “Yes,” I 
said, “but in the first place, can you tell me 
in one sentence what you think the essence of 
psychoanalysis is?” ‘This was his answer: “Dur- 
ing psychoanalysis, the patient must lie down 
on a couch and tell you things that sometimes 
are very disagreeable to tell.” Whereupon I 
immediately retorted with the following 1m- 
provisation: “Now, in logotherapy the patient 
may remain sitting erect, but he must hear 
things that sometimes are very disagreeable to 
hear.” 

Of course, this was meant facetiously and 
not as a capsule version of logotherapy. How- 
ever, there is something in it, inasmuch as logo- 
therapy, in comparison with psychoanalysis, 
is a method less retrospective and less intro- 
spective. Logotherapy focuses rather on the 
future, that is to say, on the assignments and 


152 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


meanings to be fulfilled by the patient in his 
future. At the same time, logotherapy defo- 
cuses all the vicious-circle formations and 
feedback mechanisms that play such a great 
role in the development of neuroses. Thus the 
typical self-centeredness of the neurotic is 
broken up instead of being continually fos- 
tered and reinforced. 

To be sure, this kind of statement is an over- 
simplification; yet, in logotherapy the patient 
is actually confronted with and reoriented 
toward the meaning of his life. My improvisa- 
tion of a definition of what logotherapy 
means, therefore, holds true in that the truly 
neurotic individual does try to escape the full 
awareness of his life task. And to make him 
aware of this task, to awaken him to a fuller 
consciousness of it, can contribute much to 
his ability to overcome his neurosis. 

Let me explain why I have employed the 
term “logotherapy” as the name for my the- 
ory. Logos is a Greek word that denotes 
“meaning”! Logo-therapy or, as it has been 
called by some authors, “The Third Viennese 
School of Psychotherapy,’ focuses on the 


153 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


meaning of human existence as well as on 
man’s search for such a meaning. According 
to logotherapy, the striving to find a meaning 
in one’s life is the primary motivational force 
in man. That is why I speak of a will to mean- 
ing in contrast to the pleasure principle (or, 
as we could also term it, the will to pleasure) 
on which Freudian psychoanalysis is centered, 
as well as in contrast to the will to power 
stressed by Adlerian psychology. 


The Will to Meaning 


Man’s search for meaning is a primary force 
in his life and not a “secondary rationalization” 
of instinctual drives. This meaning is unique 
and specific in that it must and can be fulfilled 
by him alone; only then does it achieve a 
significance that will satisfy his own will to 
meaning. There are some authors who contend 
that meanings and values are “nothing but de- 
fense mechanisms, reaction formations and sub- 
limations.”” But as for myself, I would not be 
willing to live merely for the sake of mv “de- 
fense mechanisms,” nor would I be ready to 


154 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


die merely for the sake of my “reaction forma- 
tions.” Man, however, is able to live and even 
to die for the sake of his ideals and values! 

A poll of public opinion was conducted a 
few years ago in France. The results showed 
that 89% of the people polled admitted that 
man needs “something” for the sake of which 
to live. Moreover, 61°% conceded that there 
was something, or someone, in their own lives 
for whose sake they were even ready to die. 
I repeated this poll at my clinic in Vienna 
among both the patients and the personnel, and 
the outcome was practically the same as 
among the thousands of people screened in 
France; the difference was only 2%. In other 
words, the will to meaning is in most people 
fact, not faith. 

Of course, there may be some cases in which 
an individual’s concern with values is really a 
camouflage of hidden inner conflicts; but, if 
so, they represent the exceptions from the rule 
rather than the rule itself. In these instances a 
psychodynamic interpretation is justified in an 
attempt to disclose the underlying unconscious 
dynamics. In such cases we have actually to 


155 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


deal with pseudo-values (a good example of 
this is that of the bigot), and as such they have 
to be unmasked. Unmasking, or debunking, 
however, should stop as soon as one is con- 
fronted with what is authentic and genuine in 
man, e.g., man’s desire for a life that is as 
meaningful as possible. If it does not stop then, 
the man who does the debunking merely be- 
trays his own will to depreciate the spiritual 
aspirations of another. 

We have to beware of the tendency to deal 
with values in terms of the mere self-expres- 
sion of man himself. For Jogos, or “meaning,” 
is not only an emergence from existence itself 
but rather something confronting existence. 
If the meaning that is waiting to be fulfilled 
by man were really nothing but a mere expres- 
sion of self, or no more than a projection of 
his wishful thinking, it would immediately lose 
its demanding and challenging character; it 
could no longer call man forth or summon 
him. This holds true not only for the so-called 
sublimation of instinctual drives but for what 
C. G. Jung called the “archetypes” of the 
“collective unconscious” as well, inasmuch as 


156 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


the latter would also be self-expressions, name- 
ly, of mankind as a whole. This holds true as 
well for the contention of some existentialist 
thinkers who see in man’s ideals nothing but 
his own inventions. According to Jean-Paul 
Sartre, man invents himself, he designs his own 
“essence”; that is to say, what he essentially 
is, including what he should be, or ought to 
become. However, I think the meaning of our 
existence is not invented by ourselves, but 
rather detected. 

Psychodynamic research in the field of val- 
ues is legitimate; the question is whether it is 
always appropriate. Above all, we must keep in 
mind that any exclusively psychodynamic in- 
vestigation can, in principle, only reveal what 
is a driving force in man. Values, however, do 
not drive a man; they do not push him, but 
rather pull him. This is a difference, by the 
way, of which I am constantly reminded 
whenever I go through the doors of an Ameri- 
can hotel. One of them has to be pulled while 
the other has to be pushed. Now, if I say man 
is pulled by values, what is implicitly referred 
to is the fact that there is always freedom in- 


157 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


volved: the freedom of man to make his choice 
between accepting or rejecting an offer, Le., 
to fulfill a meaning potentiality or else to for- 
feit it. 

However, it should be made quite clear that 
there cannot exist in man any such thing as 
a moral drive, or even a religious drive, in the 
same manner as we speak of man’s being de- 
termined by basic instincts. Man 1s never 
driven to moral behavior; in each instance he 
decides to behave morally. Man does not do 
so in order to satisfy a moral drive and to have 
a good conscience; he does so for the sake of 
a cause to which he commits himself, or for a 
person whom he loves, or for the sake of his 
God. If he actually did it for the sake of hav- 
ing a good conscience, he would become a 
Pharisee and cease to be a truly moral person. 
I think that even the saints did not care for 
anything other than simply to serve God, and 
J doubt that they ever had it in mind to be- 
come saints. If that were the case, they would 
have become only perfectionists rather than 
saints. Certainly, “a good conscience is the best 


pillow,” as a German saying goes; but true 
158 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


morality is more than just a sleeping pill, or a 
tranquilizing drug. 


Existential Frustration 


Man’s will to meaning can also be frustrated, 
in which case logotherapy speaks of “existen- 
tial frustration.” The term “existential” may 
be used in three ways: to refer to (1) existence 
itself, 1.e., the specifically human mode of be- 
ing; (2) the meaning of existence; and (3) the 
striving to find a concrete meaning in personal 
existence, that is to say, the wi/] to meaning. 

Existential frustration can also result in neu- 
rosis. For this type of neurosis, logotherapy 
has coined the term “nodgenic neurosis” in 
contrast to neurosis in the usual sense of the 
word, 1e., psychogenic neurosis. Nodgenic 
neuroses have their origin not in the psycho- 
logical but rather in the “nodlogical” (from 
the Greek “noos” meaning mind) dimension 
of the human existence. This is another logo- 
therapeutic term which denotes anything per- 
taining to the “spiritual” core of man’s person- 
ality. It must be kept in mind, however, that 


159 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


within the frame of reference of logotherapy, 
“spiritual” does not have a primarily religious 
connotation but refers to the specifically hu- 
man dimension. 


Nodgenic Neuroses 


Nodgenic neuroses do not emerge from 
conflicts between drives and instincts but 
rather from conflicts between various values; 
in other words, from moral conflicts or, to 
speak in a more general way, from spiritual 
problems. Among such problems, existential 
frustration often plays a large role. 

It is obvious that in nodgenic cases the ap- 
propriate and adequate therapy is not psycho- 
therapy in general but rather logotherapy; a 
therapy, that is, that dares to enter the spiritual 
dimension of human existence. In fact, logos 
in Greek means not only “meaning” but also 
“spirit.” Spiritual issues such as man’s aspira- 
tion for a meaningful existence, as well as the 
frustration of this aspiration, are dealt with by 
logotherapy in spiritual terms. They are taken 
sincerely and earnestly instead of being traced 


160 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


back to unconscious roots and sources, thus 
being dealt with merely in instinctual terms. 

Whenever a doctor fails to distinguish be- 
tween the spiritual dimension as against the 
instinctual, a dangerous confusion may arise. 
Let me quote the following instance: A high- 
ranking American diplomat came to my office 
in Vienna in order to continue psychoanalytic 
treatment that he had begun five years previ- 
ously with an analyst in New York. At the 
outset I asked him why he thought he should 
be analyzed, why his analysis had been started 
in the first place. It turned out that the patient 
was discontented with his career and found it 
most difficult to comply with American for- 
eign policy. His analyst, however, had told 
him again and again that he should try to re- 
concile himself with his father because the 
government of the U.S. as well as his superiors 
were “nothing but” father images and, conse- 
quently, his dissatisfaction with his job was 
due to the hatred he unconsciously harbored 
toward his father. Through an analysis lasting 
five years, the patient had been prompted 
more and more to accept his analyst’s inter- 


161 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


pretations until he finally was unable to see 
the forest of reality for the trees of symbols 
and images. After a few interviews, it was 
clear that his will to meaning was frustrated by 
his vocation, and he actually longed to be en- 
gaged in some other kind of work. As there 
was no reason for not giving up his profession 
and embarking on a different one, he did so, 
with most gratifying results. He has remained 
contented in this new occupation for over five 
years, as he recently reported. I doubt that, in 
this case, I was dealing with a neurotic condi- 
tion at all, and that is why I thought that 
he did not need any psychotherapy, nor even 
logotherapy, for the simple reason that he was 
not actually a patient. Not every conflict 1s 
necessarily neurotic; some amount of conflict 
is normal and healthy. In a similar sense suffer- 
ing is not always a pathological phenomenon; 
rather than being a symptom of neurosis, suf- 
fering may well be a human achievement, 
especially if the suffering grows out of existen- 
tial frustration. I would strictly deny that one’s 
search for a meaning to his existence, or even 
his doubt of it, in every case is derived from, 


162 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


or results in, any disease. Existential frustra- 
tion is in itself neither pathological nor patho- 
genic. A man’s concern, even his despair, over 
the worthwhileness of life is a spiritual distress 
but by no means a mental disease. It may well 
be that interpreting the first in terms of the 
latter motivates a doctor to bury his patient’s 
existential despair under a heap of tranquiliz- 
ing drugs. It is his task, rather, to pilot the 
patient through his existential crises of growth 
and development. 

Logotherapy regards its assignment as that 
of assisting the patient to find meaning in his 
life. Inasmuch as logotherapy makes him aware 
of the hidden logos of his existence, it is an 
analytical process. To this extent, logotherapy 
resembles psychoanalysis. However, in logo- 
therapy’s attempt to make something con- 
scious again it does not restrict its activity to 
instinctual facts within the individual’s uncon- 
scious, but also cares for spiritual realities such 
as the potential meaning of his existence to be 
fulfilled, as well as his wil] to meaning. Any 
analysis, however, even when it refrains from 
including the nodlogical or spiritual dimension 


163 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


in its therapeutic process, tries to make the 
patient aware of what he actually longs for in 
the depth of his being. Logotherapy deviates 
from psychoanalysis insofar as it considers 
man as a being whose main concern consists 
in fulfilling a meaning and in actualizing val- 
ues, rather than in the mere gratification and 
satisfaction of drives and instincts, the mere 
reconciliation of the conflicting claims of id, 
ego and superego, or mere adaptation and ad- 
justment to the society and environment. 


Noé-Dynamics 


To be sure, man’s search for meaning and 
values may arouse inner tension rather than 
inner equilibrium. However, precisely this ten- 
sion is an indispensable prerequisite of mental 
health. There is nothing in the world, I ven- 
ture to say, that would so effectively help one 
to survive even the worst conditions, as the 
knowledge that there is a meaning in one’s life. 
There is much wisdom in the words of Nietz- 
sche: “He who has a why to live for can 
bear almost any how.” I can see in these words 


164 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


a motto that holds true for any psychotherapy. 
In the Nazi concentration camps, one could 
have witnessed (and this was later confirmed 
by American psychiatrists both in Japan and 
Korea) that those who knew that there was a 
task waiting for them to fulfill were most apt 
to survive. 

As for myself, when I was taken to the con- 
centration camp of Auschwitz, a manuscript 
of mine ready for publication was confiscated.! 
Certainly, my deep concern to write this man- 
uscript anew helped me to survive the rigors 
of the camp. For instance, when I fell ill with 
typhus fever I jotted down on little scraps of 
paper many notes intended to enable me to 
rewrite the manuscript, should I live to the 
day of liberation. I am sure that this recon- 
struction of my lost manuscript in the dark 
barracks of a Bavarian concentration camp 
assisted me in overcoming the danger of col- 
lapse. 

Thus it can be seen that mental health 1s 
based on a certain degree of tension, the ten- 


1 This was the first version of my first book, the English transla- 
tion of which was published in 1955 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 
New York, under the title The Doctor and the Soul: An Introduc- 
tion to Logotherapy. 


165 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
sion between what one has already achieved 
and what one still ought to accomplish, or the 
gap between what one is and what one should 
become. Such a tension is inherent in the hu- 
man being and therefore is indispensable to 
mental well-being. We should not, then, be 
hesitant about challenging man with a poten- 
tial meaning for him to fulfill. It is only thus 
that we evoke his will to meaning from its 
state of latency. I consider it a dangerous mis- 
conception of mental hygiene to assume that 
what man needs in the first place is equilibrium 
or, as it is called in biology, “homeostasis,” i.e., 
a tensionless state. What man actually needs 1s 
not a tensionless state but rather the striving 
and struggling for some goal worthy of him. 
What he needs is not the discharge of tension 
at any cost, but the call of a potential meaning 
waiting to be fulfilled by him. What man 
needs is not homeostasis but what I call “no6- 
dynamics,” i.e., the spiritual dynamics in a 
polar field of tension where one pole is repre- 
sented by a meaning to be fulfilled and the 
other pole by the man who must fulfill ir. And 
one should not think that this holds true only 


166 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


for normal conditions; in neurotic individuals, 
it is even more valid. If architects want to 
strengthen a decrepit arch, they increase the 
load that is laid upon it, for thereby the parts 
are joined more firmly together. So, if thera- 
pists wish to foster their patients’ mental 
health, they should not be afraid to increase 
that load through a reorientation toward the 
meaning of one’s life. 

Having shown the beneficial impact of 
meaning orientation, I shall now turn to the 
detrimental influence of that feeling of which 
so many patients complain today, namely, the 
feeling of the total and ultimate meaningless- 
ness of their lives. They lack the awareness of 
a meaning worth living for. They are haunted 
by the experience of their inner emptiness, a 
void within themselves; they are caught in that 
situation which I have called the “existential 
vacuum.” 


The Existential Vacuum 


The existential vacuum is a widespread phe- 
nomenon of the twentieth century. This is 


167 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
understandable; it may be due to a twofold 
loss that man had to undergo since he became 
a truly human being. At the beginning of hu- 
man history, man lost some of the basic ani- 
mal instincts in which an animal’s behavior is 
embedded and by which it is secured. Such se- 
curity, like Paradise, is closed to man forever; 
man has to make choices. In addition to this, 
however, man has suffered another loss in his 
more recent development: the traditions that 
had buttressed his behavior are now rapidly 
diminishing. No instinct tells him what he has 
to do, and no tradition tells him what he ought 
to do; soon he will not know what he wants 
to do. More and more he will be governed by 
what others want him to do, thus increasingly 
falling prey to conformism. 

A cross-sectional, statistical survey of the 
patients and the nursing staff was conducted 
by my staff in the neurological department at 
the Vienna Poliklinik Hospital. It revealed that 
55% of the persons questioned showed a more 
or less marked degree of existential vacuum. In 
other words, more than half of them had ex- 


168 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


perienced a loss of the feeling that life 1s mean- 
ingful. 

This existential vacuum manifests itself 
mainly in a state of boredom. Now we can 
understand Schopenhauer when he said that 
mankind was apparently doomed to vacillate 
eternally between the two extremes of distress 
and boredom. In actual fact, boredom is now 
causing, and certainly bringing to psychia- 
trists, more problems to solve than is distress. 
And these problems are growing increasingly 
crucial, for progressive automation will prob- 
ably lead to an enormous increase in the lei- 
sure hours of average workers. The pity of it 
is that many of them will not know what to 
do with all their newly acquired free time. 

Let us think, for instance, of “Sunday neu- 
rosis,’ that kind of depression which afflicts 
people who become aware of the lack of con- 
tent in their lives when the rush of the busy 
week is over and the void within themselves 
becomes manifest. Not a few cases of suicide 
can be traced back to this existential vacuum. 
Such widespread phenomena as alcoholism and 
juvenile delinquency are not understandable 


169 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


unless we recognize the existential vacuum un- 
derlying them. This is also true of the crises of 
pensioners and aging people. 

Moreover, there are various masks and 
guises under which the existential vacuum ap- 
pears. Sometimes the frustrated will to mean- 
ing is vicariously compensated for by a will to 
power, including the most primitive form of 
the will to power, the will to money. In other 
cases, the place of frustrated will to meaning 
is taken by the will to pleasure. That is why 
existential frustration often eventuates in sex- 
ual compensation. We can observe, in such 
cases, that the sexual libido becomes rampant 
in the existential vacuum. 

An analogous event occurs in neurotic cases. 
There are certain types of feedback mech- 
anisms and vicious-circle formations that I will 
touch upon later. One can observe again and 
again, however, that this symptomatology has 
invaded an existential vacuum wherein it con- 
tinues to flourish. In such patients, what we 
have to deal with is not a noégenic neurosis. 
However, we will never succeed in having 
the patient overcome his condition it we do 


170 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


not supplement the psychotherapeutic treat- 
ment with logotherapy. For by filling the 
existential vacuum, the patient will be pre- 
vented from further relapses. Therefore, logo- 
therapy is indicated not only in nodgenic 
cases, as pointed out above, but also in psycho- 
genic cases, and in particular in what I have 
termed the “somatogenic (pseudo-) neuroses.” 
Viewed in this light, a statement once made 
by Magda B. Arnold? is justified: “Every ther- 
apy must in some way, no matter how re- 
stricted, also be logotherapy.” 

Let us now consider what we can do if a 
patient asks what is the meaning of his life. 


The Meaning of Life 


I doubt whether a doctor can answer this 
question in general terms. For the meaning of 
life differs from man to man, from day to day 
and from hour to hour. What matters, there- 
fore, is not the meaning of life in general but 
rather the specific meaning of a person’s life at 
a given moment. To put the question in gen- 


2 Magda B. Armold and John A. Gasson, The Human Person 
(New York: The Ronald Press Company, 1954), p. 618. 


171 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


eral terms would be comparable to the ques- 
tion posed to a chess champion, “Tell me, 
Master, what is the best move in the world?” 
There simply is no such thing as the best or 
even a good move apart from a particular sit- 
uation in a game and the particular personality 
of one’s opponent. The same holds for human 
existence. One should not search for an ab- 
stract meaning of life. Everyone has his own 
specific vocation or mission in life; everyone 
must carry out a concrete assignment that de- 
mands fulfillment. Therein he cannot be re- 
placed, nor can his life be repeated. Thus, ev- 
eryone’s task is as unique as is his specific op- 
portunity to implement it. 

As each situation in life represents a chal- 
lenge to man and presents a problem for him 
to solve, the question of the meaning of life 
may actually be reversed. Ultimately, man 
should not ask what the meaning of his life is, 
but rather must recognize that it is he who is 
asked. In a word, each man 1s questioned by 


life; and he can only answer to life by answer- 
ing for his own life; to life he can only re- 
spond by being responsible. ‘Thus, logotherapy 


172 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


sees in responsibleness the very essence of hu- 
man. existence. 


The Essence of Existence 


This emphasis on responsibleness is reflected 
in the categorical imperative of logotherapy, 
which is: “So live as if you were living already 
for the second time and as if you had acted the 
first time as wrongly as you are about to act 
now!” It seems to me that there is nothing 
that would stimulate a man’s sense of respon- 
sibleness more than this maxim, which invites 
him to imagine first that the present is past and, 
second, that the past may yet be changed and 
amended. Such a precept confronts him with 
life’s finiteness as well as the finality of what 
he makes out of both his life and himself. 

Logotherapy tries to make the patient fully 
aware of his own responsibleness; therefore it 
must leave to him the option for what, to 
what or to whom he understands himself to be 
responsible. That is why a logotherapist is the 
least tempted of all psychotherapists to impose 
value judgments on the patient, for he will 


173 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
never permit the patient to pass on to the doc- 
tor the responsibility of judging. 

It is, therefore, up to the patient to decide 
whether he should interpret his life task as be- 
ing responsible to society or to his own con- 
science. The majority, however, consider 
themselves accountable before God; they rep- 
resent those who do not interpret their own 
lives merely in terms of a task assigned to them 
but also in terms of the taskmaster who has as- 
signed it to them. 

Logotherapy is neither teaching nor preach- 
ing. It is as far removed from logical reason- 
ing as it is from moral exhortation. To put it 
figuratively, the role played by a logotherapist 
is rather that of an eye specialist than that of a 
painter. A painter tries to convey to us a pic- 
ture of the world as he sees it; an ophthalmolo- 
gist tries to enable us to see the world as it 
really is. he logotherapist’s role consists in 
widening and broadening the visual field of the 
patient so that the whole spectrum of meaning 


and values becomes conscious and visible to 


him. Logotherapy does not need to impose any 
174 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


judgments on the patient, for, actually, truth 
imposes itself and needs no intervention. 

By declaring that man is a responsible crea- 
ture and must actualize the potential meaning 
of his life, I wish to stress that the true mean- 
ing of life is to be found in the world rather 
than within man or his own psyche, as though 
it were a closed system. By the same token, the 
real aim of human existence cannot be found 
in what is called self-actualization. Human ex- 
istence is essentially self-transcendence rather 
than self-actualization. Self-actualization is not 
a possible aim at all, for the simple reason that 
the more a man would strive for it, the more 
he would miss it. For only to the extent to 
which man commits himself to the fulfillment 
of his life’s meaning, to this extent he also ac- 
tualizes himself. In other words, self-actualiza- 
tion cannot be attained if it is made an end in 
itself, but only as a side effect of self-tran- 
scendence. 

The world must not be regarded as a mere 
expression of one’s self. Nor must the world 
be considered as a mere instrument, or as a 


means to the end of one’s self-actualization. In 


175 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
both cases, the world view, or the Weltan- 
schauung, turns into a Weltentwertung, 1e., a 
depreciation of the world. 

Thus far we have shown that the meaning 
of life always changes, but that it never ceases 
to be. According to logotherapy, we can dis- 
cover this meaning in life in three different 
ways: (1) by doing a deed; (2) by experienc- 
ing a value; and (3) by suffering. The first, 
the way of achievement or accomplishment, is 
quite obvious. The second and third need fur- 
ther elaboration. 

The second way of finding a meaning in life 
is by experiencing something, such as a work 
of nature or culture; and also by experiencing 
someone, i.e., by love. 


The Meaning of Love 


Love is the only way to grasp another hu- 
man being in the innermost core of his per- 
sonality. No one can become fully aware of 
the very essence of another human being un- 
less he loves him. By the spiritual act of love 
he is enabled to see the essential traits and fea- 


176 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


tures in the beloved person; and even more, he 
sees that which is potential in him, that which 
is not yet actualized but yet ought to be 
actualized. Furthermore, by his love, the lov- 
ing person enables the beloved person to ac- 
tualize these potentialities. By making him 
aware of what he can be and of what he 
should become, he makes these potentialities 
come true. 

In logotherapy, love is not interpreted as a 
mere epiphenomenon? of sexual drives and in- 
stincts in the sense of a so-called sublimation. 
Love is as primary a phenomenon as sex. Nor- 
mally, sex is a mode of expression for love. Sex 
is justified, even sanctified, as soon as, but only 
as long as, it 1s a vehicle of love. Thus love is 
not understood as a mere side effect of sex but 
sex as a way of expressing the experience of 
that ultimate togetherness that is called love. 

A third way to find a meaning in life is by 
suffering. 


3 A phenomenon that occurs as the result of a primary phenome- 


177 


non. 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


The Meaning of Suffering 


Whenever one is confronted with an ines- 
capable, unavoidable situation, whenever one 
has to face a fate that cannot be changed, e.g., 
an incurable disease, such as an inoperable can- 
cer, just then is one given a last chance to ac- 
tualize the highest value, to fulfill the deepest 
meaning, the meaning of suffering. For what 
matters above all is the attitude we take toward 
suffering, the attitude in which we take our 
suffering upon ourselves. 

Let me cite a clear-cut example: Once, an 
elderly general practitioner consulted me be- 
cause of his severe depression. He could not 
overcome the loss of his wife who had died 
two years before and whom he had loved 
above all else. Now how could I help him? 
What should I tell him? Well, I refrained from 
telling him anything, but instead confronted 
him with the question, “What would have 
happened, Doctor, if you had died first, and 
your wife would have had to survive you?” 
“Oh,” he said, “for her this would have been 


178 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


terrible; how she would have suffered!” 
Whereupon I replied, “You see, Doctor, such 
a suffering has been spared her, and it is you 
who have spared her this suffering; but now, 
you have to pay for it by surviving and 
mourning her.” He said no word but shook 
my hand and calmly left my office. Suffering 
ceases to be suffering in some way at the mo- 
ment it finds a meaning, such as the meaning 
of a sacrifice. 

Of course, this was no therapy in the proper 
sense since, first, his despair was no disease; 
and second, I could not change his fate, I 
could not revive his wife. But in that moment 
I did succeed in changing his attitude toward 
his unalterable fate inasmuch as from that time 
on he could at least see a meaning in his suffer- 
ing. It is one of the basic tenets of logotherapy 
that man’s main concern is not to gain pleasure 
or to avoid pain, but rather to see a meaning 
in his life. That is why man is even ready to 
suffer, on the condition, to be sure, that his 
suffering has a meaning. 

It goes without saying that suffering would 


not have a meaning unless it were absolutely 
179 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


necessary; e.g., a cancer that can be cured by 
surgery must not be shouldered by the patient 
as though it were his cross. This would be 
masochism rather than heroism. But if a doc- 
tor can neither heal the disease nor bring re- 
lief to the patient by easing his pain, he should 
enlist the patient’s capacity to fulfill the mean- 
ing of his suffering. Traditional psychother- 
apy has aimed at restoring one’s capacity to 
work and to enjoy life; logotherapy includes 
these, yet goes further by having the patient 
regain his capacity to suffer, if need be, there- 
by finding meaning even in suffering. 

In this context Edith Weisskopf-Joelson, 
professor of psychology at Purdue University, 
contends, in her article on logotherapy,* that 
“our current mental-hygiene philosophy 
stresses the idea that pecple ought to be happy, 
that unhappiness is a symptom of maladjust- 
ment. Such a value system might be respon- 
sible for the fact that the burden of unavoid- 
able unhappiness is increased by unhappiness 
about being unhappy.” And in another paper® 


4Edith Weisskopf-Joelson, “Some Comments on a _ Viennese 
School of Psychiatry,” The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psy- 
chology, Vol. 51, pp. 701-3 (1955). 

5 Edith Weisskopf-Joelson, “‘Logotherapy and Existential Analy- 
sis,” Acta psychotherap., Vol. 6, pp. 193-204 (1958.) 


180 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 

she expresses the hope that logotherapy “may 
help counteract certain unhealthy trends in the 
present-day culture of the United States, 
where the incurable sufferer is given very lit- 
tle opportunity to be proud of his suffering 
and to consider it ennobling rather than de- 
grading” so that “he is not only unhappy, but 
also ashamed of being unhappy.” 

There are situations in which one is cut off 
from the opportunity to do one’s work or to 
enjoy one’s life; but what never can be ruled 
out is the unavoidability of suffering. In ac- 
cepting this challenge to suffer bravely, life 
has a meaning up to the last moment, and it re- 
tains this meaning literally to the end. In other 
words, life’s meaning is an unconditional one, 
for it even includes the potential meaning of 
suffering. 

Let me recall that which was perhaps the 
deepest experience I had in the concentration 
camp. [he odds of surviving the camp were 
no more than one to twenty, as can easily be 
verified by exact statistics. It did not even seem 
possible, let alone probable, that the manu- 


181] 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
script of my first book, which I had hidden in 
my coat when I arrived at Auschwitz, would 
ever be rescued. Thus, I had to undergo and 
to overcome the loss of my spiritual child. And 
now it seemed as if nothing and no one would 
survive me; neither a physical nor a spiritual 
child of my own! So I found myself con- 
fronted with the question of whether under 
such circumstances my life was ultimately 
void of any meaning. 

Not yet did I notice that an answer to this 
question with which I was wrestling so pas- 
sionately was already in store for me, and that 
soon thereafter this answer would be given to 
me. This was the case when I had to surren- 
der my clothes and in turn inherited the worn- 
out rags of an inmate who had been sent to the 
gas chamber immediately after his arrival at 
the Auschwitz railway station. Instead of the 


many pages of my manuscript, I found in a 


pocket of the newly acquired coat a single 

page torn out of a Hebrew prayer book, 

which contained the main Jewish prayer, 

Shema Yisrael. How should I have interpreted 
182 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


such a “coincidence” other than as a challenge 
to live my thoughts instead of merely putting 
them on paper? 

A bit later, I remember, it seemed to me that 
I would die in the near future. In this critical 
situation, however, my concern was different 
from that of most of my comrades. Their 
question was, “Will we survive the camp? For, 
if not, all this suffering has no meaning.” The 
question which beset me was, “Has all this 
suffering, this dying around us, a meaning? 
For, if not, then ultimately there is no mean- 
ing to survival; for a life whose meaning de- 
pends upon such a happenstance—whether one 
escapes or not—ultimately would not be worth 
living at all.” 


Meta-Clinical Problems 


More and more, a doctor is confronted with 
the questions: What is life? What is suffering 
after all? Indeed, incessantly and continually a 
psychiatrist is approached today by patients 
who confront him with human problems 
rather than neurotic symptoms. Some of the 


183 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
people who nowadays call on a psychiatrist 
would have seen a pastor, priest or rabbi in 
former days, but now they often refuse to be 
handed over to a clergyman, so that the doctor 
is confronted with philosophical questions 
rather than emotional conflicts. 


A Logodrama 


I should like to cite the following instance: 
Once, the mother of a boy who had died at 
the age of eleven years was admitted to my 
clinic after a suicide attempt. My associate, 
Dr. Kocourek, invited her to join a therapeutic 
group, and it happened that I stepped into the 
room of the clinic where he was conducting a 
psychodrama. She was telling her story. At the 
death of her boy she was left alone with an- 
other, older son, who was crippled, suffering 
from infantile paralysis. The poor boy had to 
be moved around in a chair. His mother, how- 
ever, rebelled against her fate. But when she 
tried to commit suicide together with him, it 
was the crippled son who prevented her from 
doing so; he liked living! For him, life had re- 


184 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


mained meaningful. Why was it not so for his 
mother? How could her life still have a mean- 
ing? And how could we help her to become 
aware of it? 

Improvising, I participated in the discus- 
sion, and questioned another woman in the 
group. I asked her how old she was and she 
answered, “Thirty.” I replied, “No, you are 
not thirty but instead eighty and lying on your 
death bed. And now you are looking back on 
your life, a life that was childless but full of fi- 
nancial success and social prestige.” And then 
I invited her to imagine what she would feel 
in this situation. “What will you think of it? 
What will you say to yourself?” Let me quote 
what she actually said from a tape that was re- 
corded during that session. “Oh, I married a 
millionaire; I had an easy life full of wealth; 
and I lived it up! I flirted with men, I teased 
them! But now, I am eighty; I have no chil- 
dren of my own. Looking back as an old 
woman, I cannot see what all that was for; 
actually, I must say, my life was a failure!” 

I then invited the mother of the handi- 
capped son to imagine herself similarly looking 


185 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
back over her life. Let us listen to what she 
had to say as recorded on the tape: “I wished 
to have children and this wish has been grant- 
ed to me; one boy died, the other, however, 
the crippled one, would have been sent to an 
institution if I had not taken over his care. 
Though he is crippled and helpless, he is after 
all my boy. And so I have made a fuller life 
possible for him; I have made a better human 
being out of my son.” At this moment, there 
was an outburst of tears, and crying, she con- 
tinued: “As for myself, I can look back peace- 
fully on my life; for I can say my life was full 
of meaning, and I have tried hard to fulfill it; I 
have done my best—I have done the best for 
my son. My life was no failure!” Viewing her 
life as if from her death bed, she had suddenly 
been able to see a meaning in it, a meaning that 
included even all of her sufferings. By the 
same token, however, it had become clear as 
well that a life of short duration, like that, for 
example, of her dead boy, could be so rich in 
joy and love that it could contain more mean- 
ing than a life lasting eighty years. 

After a while I proceeded to another ques- 


186 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


tion, this time addressing myself to the whole 
group. [he question was whether an ape that 
was being used to develop poliomyelitis serum, 
and for this reason punctured again and again, 
would ever be able to grasp the meaning of its 
suffering. Unanimously, the group replied that 
of course it would not; for with its limited 1n- 
telligence it could not enter into the world of 
man, i.e., the only world in which its suffer- 
ing would be understandable. Then I pushed 
forward with the following question: “And 
what about man? Are you sure that the human 
world is a terminal point in the evolution of 
the cosmos? Is it not conceivable that there is 
still another dimension possible, a world be- 
yond man’s world; a world in which the ques- 
tion of an ultimate meaning of human suffer- 
ing would find an answer?” 


The Supra-Meaning 


This ultimate meaning necessarily exceeds 
and surpasses the finite intellectual capacities 
of man; in logotherapy, we speak in this con- 
text of a supra-meaning. What is demanded of 


187 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
man is not, as some existential philosophers 
teach, to endure the meaninglessness of life; 
but rather to bear his incapacity to grasp its 
unconditional meaningfulness in _ rational 
terms. Logos is deeper than logic. 

A psychiatrist who goes beyond the con- 
cept of the supra-meaning would sooner or 
later be embarrassed by his patients, just as I 
was when my six-year-old daughter asked me 
the question, ‘““Why do we speak of the good 
Lord?” Whereupon I said: “Some weeks ago, 
you were suffering from measles, and then, the 
good Lord sent you full recovery.” However, 
the little girl was not content, but retorted, 
“Well; but, please, Daddy, do not forget: in 
the first place, he had sent me the measles.” 

However, when a patient stands on the firm 
ground of religious belief, there can be no ob- 
jection to making use of the therapeutic ef- 
fect of his religious convictions and thereby 
drawing upon his spiritual resources. In order 
to do so, the psychiatrist may put himself in 
the place of the patient. That is exactly what 
I did once, for instance, when a rabbi from an 
Fastern country turned to me and told me his 


188 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 

story. He had lost his first wife and their six 
children in the concentration camp of Ausch- 
witz where they were gassed, and now it 
turned out that his second wife was sterile. I 
observed that procreation is not the only 
meaning of life, for then life in itself would 
become meaningless, and something that in it- 
self is meaningless cannot be rendered mean- 
ingful merely by its perpetuation. However, 
the rabbi evaluated his plight as an orthodox 
Jew in terms of despair that there was no son 
of his own who would ever say Kaddish® for 
him after his death. 

But I would not give up. I made a last at- 
tempt to help him by inquiring whether he 
did not hope to see his children again in 
Heaven. However, my question was followed 
by an outburst of tears, and now the true rea- 
son of his despair came to the fore: he ex- 
plained that his children, since they died as 
innocent martyrs,’ were found worthy of the 
highest place in Heaven, but as for himself he 
could not expect, as an old sinful man, to be 


6 Prayer for the dead. 
™L’kiddush hashem, i.e., for the sanctification of God’s name. 


189 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


assigned the same place. I did not give up but 
retorted, “Is it not conceivable, Rabbi, that 
precisely this was the meaning of your surviv- 
ing your children; that you may be purified 
through these years of suffering, so that finally 
you, too, though not innocent like your chil- 
dren, may become worthy of joining them in 
Heaven? Is it not written in the Psalms that 
God preserves all your tears*? So, perhaps 
none of your sufferings were in vain.” For the 
first time in many years he found relief from 
his suffering, through the new point of view 
that I was able to open up to him. 


Life’s Transitoriness 


To those things that seem to take meaning 
away from human life belong not only suffer- 
ing but dying as well, not only distress but also 
death. I never tire of saying that the only 
really transitory aspects of life are the poten- 
tialities; but the moment they are actualized, 
they are rendered realities; they are saved and 
delivered into the past, wherein they are res- 


8 “Thou hast kept count of my tossings; put thou my tears in 
thy bottle! Are they not in thy book?” (Ps. 56:8.) 


190 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 
cued and preserved from transitoriness. For, 
in the past, nothing is irrecoverably lost but 
everything irrevocably stored. 

Thus, the transitoriness of our existence in 
no way makes it meaningless. But it does con- 
stitute our responsibleness; for everything 
hinges upon our realizing the essentially tran- 
sitory possibilities. Man constantly makes his 
choice concerning the mass of present poten- 
tialities; which of these will be condemned to 
nonbeing and which will be actualized? 
Which choice will be made an actuality once 
and forever, an immortal “footprint in the 
sands of time”? At any moment, man must de- 
cide, for better or for worse, what will be the 
monument of his existence. 

Usually, to be sure, man considers only the 
stubble field of transitoriness and overlooks 
the full granaries of the past wherein he has 
salvaged once and for all his deeds and his joys 
and also his sufferings. Nothing can be un- 
done, and nothing can be done away with. I 
should say having been is the surest kind of 
being. 

Logotherapy, keeping in mind the essential 


191 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
transitoriness of human existence, is not pessi- 
mistic but rather activistic. Io express this 
point figuratively we might say: The pessimist 
resembles a man who observes with fear and 
sadness that his wall calendar, from which he 
daily tears a sheet, grows thinner with each 
passing day. On the other hand, the person 
who attacks the problems of life actively is 
like a man who removes each successive leaf 
from his calendar and files it neatly and care- 
fully away with its predecessors, after first 
having jotted down a few diary notes on the 
back. He can reflect with pride and joy on all 
the richness set down in these notes, on all the 
life he has already lived to the full. What will 
it matter to him if he notices that he is grow- 
ing old? Has he any reason to envy the young 
people whom he sees, or wax nostalgic over 
his own lost youth? What reasons has he to 
envy a young person? For the possibilities 
that a young person has, the future that is in 
store for him? “No, thank you,” he will 
think. “Instead of possibilities, I have realities 
in my past, not only the reality of work done 
and of love loved, but of suffering suffered. 


192 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


These are the things of which I am most 
proud, though these are things which cannot 
inspire envy.” 


Logotherapy as a Technique 


A realistic fear, such as the fear of death, 
cannot be tranquilized away by its psychody- 
namic interpretation; on the other hand, a neu- 
rotic fear, such as agoraphobia, cannot be 
cured by philosophical understanding. How- 
ever, logotherapy has developed a special tech- 
nique to handle these cases also. To under- 
stand what is going on whenever this tech- 
nique is used, we take as a starting point a con- 
dition that is frequently met in neurotic indi- 
viduals, namely, anticipatory anxiety. It 1s 
characteristic of this fear that it produces pre- 
cisely that of which the patient is afraid. An 
individual, for example, who is afraid of blush- 
ing when he enters a large room and faces 
many people, will actually blush. In this con- 
text, one might transpose the saying “the wish 
is father to the thought” to “the fear is mother 
of the event.” 


193 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


Ironically enough, in the same way that fear 
brings to pass what one is afraid of, a forced 
intention makes impossible what one forcibly 
wishes. This excessive intention, or “hyper- 
intention” as I should call it, can be observed 
particularly in cases of sexual neurosis. The 
more a man tries to demonstrate his sexual po- 
tency or a woman her ability to experience 
orgasm, the less they are able to succeed. 
Pleasure is, and must remain, a side effect or 
by-product, and is destroyed and spoiled to 
the degree to which it is made a goal in itself. 

In addition to excessive intention as de- 
scribed above, excessive attention, or “hyper- 
reflection” as it is called in logotherapy, may 
also be pathogenic (that is, lead to sickness). 
The following clinical report will indicate 
what I mean. A young woman came to me 
complaining of being frigid. The case history 
showed that in her childhood she had been 
sexually abused by her father. However, it was 
not this traumatic experience in itself that 
had eventuated in her sexual neurosis, as could 
easily be evidenced. For it turned out that, 


through reading popular psychoanalytic lit- 
194 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


erature, the patient had lived all the time in the 
fearful expectation of the toll that her trau- 
matic experience would some day take. This 
anticipatory anxiety resulted in both exces- 
sive intention to confirm her femininity and 
excessive attention centered upon herself 
rather than upon her partner. This was enough 
to incapacitate the patient for the peak experi- 
ence of sexual pleasure, since the orgasm 1s 
made an object of intention and an object of 
attention as well, instead of remaining an un- 
intended effect of unreflected commitment to 
the partner. After undergoing short-term 
logotherapy, the patient’s excessive attention 
and intention of her ability to experience or- 
gasm was “de-reflected,” to introduce another 
logotherapeutic term. When her attention was 
refocused toward the proper object, ie., the 
partner, orgasm established itself spon- 
taneously.” 

On the twofold fact that fear makes come 
true that which one is afraid of, and that 


®In order to treat cases of sexual impotency, in logotherapy a 
specific technique has been developed, based on its theory of 
hyper-intention and hyper-reflection as sketched above. Of course, 
this cannot be dealt with in this brief presentation of the prin- 
ciples of logotherapy. 


195 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


hyper-intention makes impossible what one 
wishes, logotherapy bases its technique called 
“paradoxical intention.” In this approach the 
phobic patient is invited to intend, even if only 
for a moment, precisely that which he fears. 

Let me recall a case. A young physician 
consulted me because of his fear of perspiring. 
Whenever he expected an outbreak of per- 
spiration, this anticipatory anxiety was enough 
to precipitate excessive sweating. In order to 
cut this circle formation [ advised the patient, 
in the event that sweating should recur, to re- 
solve deliberately to show people how much 
he could sweat. A week later he returned to 
report that whenever he met anyone who trig- 
gered his anticipatory anxiety, he said to him- 
self, “I only sweated out a quart before, but 
now I’m going to pour at least ten quarts!” 
The result was that, after suffering from his 
phobia for four years, he was able, after a sin- 
gle session, to free himself permanently of it 
within one week. 

The reader will note that this procedure 
consists in a reversal of the patient’s attitude, 


inasmuch as his fear is replaced by a paradoxi- 
196 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 
cal wish. By this treatment, the wind is taken 
out of the sails of the anxiety. 

Such a procedure, however, must make use 
of the specifically human capacity for self-de- 
tachment inherent in a sense of humor. This 
basic capacity to detach one from oneself is 
actualized whenever the logotherapeutic tech- 
nique called “paradoxical intention” is applied. 
At the same time, the patient is enabled to put 
himself at a distance from his own neurosis. 
Gordon W. Allport writes'®: “The neurotic 
who learns to laugh at himself may be on the 
way to self-management, perhaps to cure.” 
Paradoxical intention is the empirical valida- 
tion and clinical application of Allport’s state- 
ment. 

A few more case reports may serve to clari- 
fy this method further. The following patient 
was a bookkeeper who had been treated by 
many doctors and in several clinics without 
any therapeutic success. When he came to my 
clinic, he was in extreme despair, admitting 
that he was close to suicide. For some years, he 


10Gordon W. Allport, The Individual and His Religion (New 


197 


York: The Macmillan Company, 1956), p. 92. 


MAN'S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


had suffered from a writer’s cramp, which had 
recently become so severe that he was in dan- 
ger of losing his job. Therefore only immedi- 
ate short-term therapy could alleviate the sit- 
uation. In starting treatment my associate 
recommended to the patient that he do just 
the opposite from what he usually had done; 
namely, instead of trying to write as neatly 
and legibly as possible, to write with the worst 
possible scrawl. He was advised to say to him- 
self, “Now I will show people what a good 
scribbler I am!” And at the moment in which 
he deliberately tried to scribble, he was unable 
to do so. “I tried to scrawl] but simply could 
not do it,” he said the next day. Within forty- 
eight hours the patient was in this way freed 
from his writer’s cramp, and remained free for 
the observation period after he had been 
treated. He is a happy man again and fully able 
to work. 

A similar case, dealing, however, with 
speaking rather than writing, was related to 
me by a colleague in the Laryngological De- 
partment of the Poliklinik Hospital. It was the 
most severe case of stuttering he had met in his 


198 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


many years of practice. Never in his life, as 
far as the stutterer could remember, had he 
been free from his speech trouble, even for a 
moment, except once. This happened when he 
was twelve years old and had hooked a ride 
on a street car. When caught by the conduc- 
tor, he thought that the only way to escape 
would be to elicit his sympathy, and so he 
tried to demonstrate that he was just a poor 
stuttering boy. Ihe moment he tried to stut- 
ter, he was unable to do it. Without meaning 
to, he had practiced paradoxical intention, 
though not for therapeutic purposes. 
However, this presentation should not leave 
the impression that paradoxical intention is 
effective only in monosymptomatic cases. By 
means of this logotherapeutic technique, my 
collaborators at the Vienna Poliklinik Hos- 
pital have succeeded in bringing relief even in 
obsessive-compulsive character neuroses of a 
most severe degree and duration. I refer, for 
instance, to a woman of sixty-five who had 
suffered for sixty years from a washing com- 
pulsion of such severity that I expected a lo- 


botomy to be the only available procedure for 


199 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


bringing relief. However, my associate started 
logotherapeutic treatment by means of para- 
doxical intention, and two months later the pa- 
tient was able to lead a normal life. Before ad- 
mission to the clinic, she had confessed, “Life 
was hell for me.” Handicapped by her com- 
pulsion and bacteriophobic obsession, she had 
finally remained in bed all day unable to do 
any housework. It would not be accurate to 
say that she is now completely free of symp- 
toms, for an obsession may come to her mind. 
However, she is able to “joke about it,” as she 
says; in short, to apply paradoxical intention. 

Paradoxical intention can also be applied in 
cases of sleep disturbance; the fear of sleepless- 
ness’? results in a hyper-intention to fall asleep, 
which, in turn, incapacitates the patient to do 
so. Lo overcome this particular fear, I usually 
advise the patient not to try to sleep but rather 
to try to do just the opposite, that is, to stay 
awake as long as possible. In other words, the 
hyper-intention to fall asleep arising from the 
anticipatory anxiety of not being able to do so, 


11 The fear of sleeplessness is, in the majority of cases, due to 
the patient’s ignorance of the fact that the organism provides itself 
with the minimum amount of sleep really needed. 


200 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 

must be replaced by the paradoxical intention 
not to fall asleep, which soon will be followed 
by sleep. 

Paradoxical intention lends itself as a use- 
ful tool in treating obsessive, compulsive and 
phobic conditions, especially in cases with un- 
derlying anticipatory anxiety. Moreover, it is 
a short-term therapeutic device. However, one 
should not conclude that such a short-term 
therapy necessarily results in only temporary 
therapeutic effects. One of “the more common 
illusions of Freudian orthodoxy,” wrote the 
late Emil A. Gutheil,!? “is that the durability 
of results corresponds to the length of ther- 
apy.” In my files there is, for instance, the case 
report of a patient to whom paradoxical inten- 
tion was administered more than twenty years 
ago; the therapeutic effect proved, neverthe- 
less, to be a permanent one. 

A most remarkable fact is that paradoxical 
intention is effective irrespective of the etio- 
logical basis in the case concerned. This con- 
firms a statement made by Edith Weisskopf- 


2 Emil A. Gutheil, American Journal of Psychotherapy, Vol 10, 


201 


p. 184 (1956). 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


Joelson**: “Although traditional psychother- 
apy has insisted that therapeutic practices have 
to be based on findings on etiology, it is pos- 
sible that certain factors might cause neuroses 
during early childhood and that entirely dif- 
ferent factors might relieve neuroses during 
adulthood.” 

What are so often regarded as the causes of 
neuroses, 1.e., complexes, conflicts and trau- 
mata, are sometimes the symptoms of the neu- 
roses rather than their causes. A reef that ap- 
pears at low tide is certainly not the cause of 
low tide; it is rather the low tide that causes 
the reef to appear. Now, what is melancholia 
if not some sort of emotional low tide? Again, 
the guilt feelings that are so typically dis- 
played in “endogenous depressions” (which 
must not be confounded with neurotic ones! ) 
are not the cause of this special type of depres- 
sion. The reverse is true, since this emotional 
low tide makes those guilt feelings appear at 
the surface of consciousness; it only brings 
them to the fore. 


13 Edith Weisskopf-Joelson, “Some Comments on_ a_ Viennese 
School of Psychiatry,” The Journal of Abnormal and Social! Psy- 
chology, Vol. 51, pp. 701-3 (1955). 


202 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


As for the actual causation of neuroses, 
apart from constitutional elements, whether 
somatic or psychic in nature, such feedback 
mechanisms as anticipatory anxiety seem to be 
a major pathogenic factor. A given symptom 
is responded to by a phobia, the phobia trig- 
gers the symptom and the symptom, in turn, 
reinforces the phobia. A similar chain of 
events, however, can be observed in obsessive- 
compulsive cases in which the patient fights 
the ideas that haunt him.** Thereby, however, 
he increases their power to disturb him, since 
pressure precipitates counter-pressure. Again 
the symptom is reinforced! On the other hand, 
as soon as the patient stops fighting his obses- 
sions and instead tries to ridicule them by 
dealing with them in an ironical way, by ap- 
plying paradoxical intention, the vicious circle 
is cut and the symptom diminishes and finally 
atrophies. In the fortunate case where there is 
no existential vacuum that invites and elicits 


the symptom, the patient will not only suc- 


14 This is often motivated by the patient’s fear that his obsessions 
indicate an, imminent or even actual psychosis; the patient is not 
aware of the emi icel fact that an obsessive-compulsive neurosis 
is immunizing hin against a formal psychosis, rather than endan- 
gering him in this direction. 


203 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


ceed in ridiculing his neurotic fear but finally 
will succeed in completely ignoring it. 

As we see, anticipatory anxiety must be 
counteracted by paradoxical intention; hyper- 
intention as well as hyper-reflection must be 
counteracted by de-reflection; de-retlection, 
however, ultimately is not possible except by 
the patient’s reorientation toward his specific 
vocation and mission in life.” 

It is not the neurotic’s self-concern, whether 
pity or contempt, that breaks the circle forma- 
tion; the cue to cure is self-commitment! 


The Collective Neurosis 


Every age has its own collective neurosis, 
and every age needs its own psychotherapy’ to 
cope with it. The existential vacuum that is the 
mass neurosis of the present time, can be de- 
scribed as a private and personal form of athil- 
ism; for nihilism can be defined as the conten- 
tion that being has no meaning. As for psycho- 
therapy, however, it will never be able to cope 


~ % This conviction is supported by Allport, who wrote: “As the 
focus of striving shifts from che -oaflict to selfless goals, the life as 
a whole becomes sounder even though the neurosis may never 
completely disappear” (op cit., p. 95) 


204 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 

with this state of affairs on a mass scale if it 
does not keep itself free from the impact and 
influence of the contemporary trends of a ni- 
hilistic philosophy; otherwise it represents a 
symptom of the mass neurosis rather than its 
possible cure. Psychotherapy would not only 
reflect a nihilistic philosophy but also, even 
though unwillingly and unwittingly, transmit 
to the patient what is actually a caricature 
rather than a true picture of man. 

First of all, there is a danger inherent in the 
teaching of man’s “nothingbutness,” the theory 
that man is nothing but the result of biological, 
psychological and sociological conditions, or 
the product of heredity and environment. 
Such a view of man makes him into a robot, 
not a human being. This neurotic fatalism 1s 
fostered and strengthened by a psychotherapy 
that denies that man is free. 

To be sure, a human being is a finite being, 
and his freedom is restricted. It is not freedom 
from conditions, but freedom to take a stand 


toward the conditions. For example, I am cer- 


tainly not responsible for the fact that I have 
205 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


gray hair; however, I am responsible for the 
fact that I did not go to the hairdresser to 
have him tint my hair—as a number of ladies 
might have done. So there is a certain amount 
of freedom left to everyone, even if only the 
choice of the color of one’s hair. 


Critique of Pan-Determinism 


Psychoanalysis has often been blamed for 
its so-called pan-sexualism. I, for one, doubt 
whether this reproach has ever been legitimate. 
However, there is something that seems to me 
to be an even more erroneous and dangerous 
assumption, namely, that which I call “pan- 
determinism.” By that I mean the view of 
man that disregards his capacity to take a 
stand toward any conditions whatsoever. Man 
is not fully conditioned and determined; he 
determines himself whether to give in to con- 
ditions or stand up to them. In other words, 
man is ultimately self-determining. Man does 
not simply exist, but always decides what his 


existence will be, what he will become in the 
next moment. 


206 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


By the same token, every human being has 
the freedom to change at any instant. There- 
fore, we can predict his future only within the 
large frame of a statistical survey referring to a 
whole group; the individual personality, how- 
ever, remains essentially unpredictable. The 
basis for any predictions would be represented 
by biological, psychological or sociological 
conditions. Yet one of the main features of hu- 
man existence is the capacity to rise above 
such conditions and transcend them. In the 
same manner, man ultimately transcends him- 
self; a human being is self-transcending being. 

Let me cite the case of Dr. J——. He was the 
only man I ever encountered in my whole life 
whom I would dare to call a Mephistophelean 
being, a satanic figure. At that time he was 
generally called “the mass murderer of Stein- 
hof,” the name of the large mental hospital in 
Vienna. When the Nazis started their eutha- 
nasia program, he held all the strings in his 
hands and was so fanatic in the job assigned to 
him that he tried not to let one single psy- 
chotic individual escape the gas chamber. 
After the war, when I came back to Vienna I 


207 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
asked what had happened to Dr. J——. “He 
had been imprisoned by the Russians in one of 
the isolation cells of Steinhof,” they told me. 
“On the next day, however, the door of his 
cell stood open and Dr. J—— was never seen 
again.” Later I was convinced that, like others, 
he had by the help of his comrades made his 
way to South America. More recently, how- 
ever, I was consulted by a former Austrian 
diplomat who had been imprisoned behind the 
Iron Curtain for many years, first in Siberia 
and then in the famous Ljubljanka prison in 
Moscow. While I was examining him neuro- 
logically, he suddenly asked me whether I 
happened to know Dr. J——. After my affirma- 
tive reply he continued: “I made his acquaint- 
ance in Ljubljanka. There he died, at about 
forty, from cancer of the urimary bladder. Be- 
fore he died, however, he showed himself to 
be the best comrade you can imagine! He gave 
consolation to everybody. He lived up to the 
highest conceivable moral standard. He was 
the best friend I ever met during my long 
years in prison!” 


This is the story of Dr. J—, “the mass mur- 
208 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


derer of Steinhof.” How can you dare to pre- 
dict the behavior of man! You may predict 
the movements of a machine, of an automaton; 
more than this, you may even try to predict 
the mechanisms or “dynamisms” of the human 
psyche as well: but man is more than psyche. 

Apparently pan-determinism is an infectious 
disease with which educators have been inocu- 
lated; and this is even true of many adherents 
of religion who are seemingly not aware that 
they are thereby undermining the very basis 
of their own convictions. For either man’s 
freedom of decision for or against God, as well 
as for or against man, must be recognized, or 
else religion is a delusion, and education an 
illusion. Freedom is presupposed by both, 
otherwise they are misconceived. 

A pan-deterministic evaluation of religion, 
however, contends that one’s religious life is 
conditioned inasmuch as it depends on one’s 
early childhood experiences, and that one’s 
God concept depends on one’s father image. 
In contrast to this view, it is well known that 
the son of a drunkard need not become a 


drunkard himself; and in the same manner, a 


209 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


man may resist the detrimental influence of a 
dreadful father image and establish a sound re- 
lationship with God. Even the worst father 
image need not prevent one from establishing 
a good relationship with God; rather, a deep 
religious life provides one with the resources 
needed to overcome the hatred of one’s fa- 
ther. Conversely, a poor religious life need not 
in each case be due to developmental factors."® 

As soon as we have interpreted religion as 
being merely a product of psychodynamics, in 
the sense of unconscious motivating forces, we 
have missed the point and lost sight of the au- 
thentic phenomenon. Through such a miscon- 
ception, the psychology of religion often be- 
comes psychology as religion, in that psychol- 
ogy is sometimes worshiped and made an 
explanation for everything. 


16 A cross-sectional statistical survey conducted by my staff at 
the Vienna Poliklinik Hospital revealed that about one third of 
those patients who had experienced a positive father image turned 
away from religion in their later life, whereas most of those people 
screened who had a negative father image succeeded, in spite of 
this, in building up a positive attitude toward religious issues. 


210 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


The Psychiatric Credo 


There is nothing conceivable that would so 
condition a man as to leave him without the 
slightest freedom. Therefore, a residue of free- 
dom, however limited it may be, is left to man 
in neurotic and even psychotic cases. Indeed, 
the innermost core of the patient’s personality 
is not even touched by a psychosis. I am re- 
minded of a man of about sixty who was 
brought to me because of his auditory halluci- 
nations lasting over many decades. I was fac- 
ing a ruined personality. As it turned out, 
everyone in his environment regarded him as 
an idiot. Yet what a strange charm radiated 
from this man! As a child he had wanted to 
become a priest. However, he had to be con- 
tent with the only joy he could experience, 
and that was singing in the church choir on 
Sunday mornings. Now, his sister, who ac- 
companied him, reported that sometimes he 
grew very excited; yet in the last moment he 
was always able to regain his self-control. I 


became interested in the psychodynamics un- 
211 


MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING 
derlying the case, for I thought there was a 
strong fixation of the patient on his sister; so I 
asked how he managed to regain his self- 
control: “For whose sake do you do so?” 
Thereupon, there was a pause of some seconds, 
and then the patient answered: “For God’s 
sake.” At this moment, the depth of his per- 
sonality revealed itself, and at the bottom of 
this depth, irrespective of the poverty of his 
intellectual endowment, an authentic religious 
life was disclosed. 

An incurably psychotic individual may lose 
his usefulness but yet retain the dignity of a 
human being. This is my psychiatric credo. 
Without it I should not think it worthwhile 
to be a psychiatrist. For whose sake? Just for 
the sake of a damaged brain machine that can- 
not be repaired? If the patient were not defi- 
nitely more, euthanasia would be justified. 


Psychiatry Rehumanized 


For too long a time, for half a century in 
fact, psychiatry tried to interpret the human 
mind merely as a mechanism, and consequent- 


Zi2 


Basic Concepts of Logotherapy 


ly the therapy of mental disease merely as a 
technique. I believe this dream has been dreamt 
out. What now begin to loom on the horizon 
are not the sketches of a psychologized medi- 
cine, but those of a humanized psychiatry. 

A doctor, however, who would still inter- 
pret his own role mainly as that of a tech- 
nician, would confess that he sees in his pa- 
tient nothing more than a machine, instead of 
seeing the human being behind the disease! 

A human being is not one thing among 
others; things determine each other, but man 
is ultimately self-determining. What he be- 
comes—within the limits of endowment and 
environment—he has made out of himself. In 
the concentration camps, for example, in this 
living laboratory and on this testing ground, 
we watched and witnessed some of our com- 
rades behave like swine while others behaved 
like saints. Man has both potentialities within 
himself; which one is actualized depends on 
decisions but not on conditions. 

Our generation is realistic, for we have 
come to know man as he really is. After all, 
man is that being who has invented the gas 


213 


MAN'S SEARCH FOR MEANING 


chambers of Auschwitz; however, he is also 
that being who has entered those gas chambers 
upright, with the Lord’s Prayer or the Shema 
Yisrael on his lips. 


English Bibliography 
of Logotherapy and Existenzanalyse 


1. Books 


Fabry, Joseph B.: The Pursuit of Meaning: Logo- 
therapy Applied to Life. Preface by Viktor E. 
Frankl. Boston: Beacon Press; 1968; Paperback 
edition: A Guide to the Theory and A pplication of 
Viktor E. Frankl’s Logotherapy; 1969. 

Frankl, Viktor E.: Man's Search for Meaning: An 
Introduction to Logotherapy. Preface by Gordon 
W. Allport. Boston: Beacon Press; 1962; Paper- 
back edition, New York: Washington Square 
Press; 1963. 

: The Doctor and the Soul: From Psychotherapy 

to Logotherapy. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.; 

second, expanded edition, 1965; Paperback editi- 
on, New York: Bantam Books, Inc.; 1967; Ban- 

tam Matrix edition; 1969. 

: Psychotherapy and Existentialism: Selected 

Papers on Logotherapy. New York: Washington 

Square Press; 1967; Clarion paperback; 1968. 

: The Will to Meaning: Foundations and Ap- 
plications of Logotherapy. New York: The World 
Publishing Company; 1969. 

Leslie, Robert C.: Jesus and Logotherapy: The 
Ministry of Jesus as Interpreted Through the Psy- 
chotherapy of Viktor Frankl. New York and Nash- 
ville: Abingdon Press; 1965; Paperback edition; 
1968. 

Tweedie, Donald F.: Logotherapy and the Christian 
Faith: An Evaluation of Frankl’s Existential Ap- 
proach to Psychotherapy. Preface by Viktor E. 
Frankl. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House; 
1961; Paperback edition; 1965. 

: The Christian and the Couch: An Introduction 
to Christian Logotherapy. Grand Rapids, Mich.: 
Baker Book House; 1963. 

Ungersma, Aaron J.: The Search for Meaning: A 


215 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


New Approach in Psychotherapy and Pastoral Psy- 
chology. Philadelphia: Westminster Press; 1961; 
Paperback edition, Foreword by Viktor E. Frankl;. 
1968. 


2. Chapters in Books 


Arnold, Magda B., and John A. Gasson: “Logother- 
apy and Existential Analysis,” in The Human 
Person. New York: Ronald Press; 1954. 

Frankl, Viktor E.: contributions to Critical Incidents 
in Psychotherapy, edited by S. W. Standal and 
R. J. Corsini. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice- 
Hall; 1959. 

: “Logotherapy and the Collective Neuroses,” 

in Progress in Psychotherapy, edited by J. H. 

Masserman and J. L. Moreno. New York: Grune 

& Stratton; 1959. 

: “The Significance of Meaning for Health,” in 

Religion and Medicine: Essays on Meaning, Values 

and Health, edited by David Belgum. Ames, Iowa: 

The Iowa State University Press; 1967. 

: “Logotherapy,” in Psychotherapy and Coun- 
seling: Studies in Technique. Chicago: Rand Mc- 
Nally; 1969. 

Strunk, Orlo: “Religious Maturity and Viktor E. 
Frankl,” in Mature Religion. New York and Nash- 
ville: Abingdon Press; 1965. 

Vanderveldt, James H., and Robert P. Odenwald: 
“Existential Analysis,” in Psychiatry and Catholi- 
cism. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1952. 

Zavalloni, Roberto: “Human Freedom and Logo- 
therapy,” in Self-Determination. Chicago: Forum 
Books; 1962. 


3. Articles and Miscellaneous* 
Ansbacher, Rowena R.: “The Third Viennese School 


* Denotes works appearing in Psychotherapy and Existential- 
ism: Selected Papers on Logotherapy. New York: Washington 
Square Press; 1967. 


216 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


of Psychotherapy.” Journal of Individual Psychol- 
ogy, XV (1959), 236-7. 

Birnbaum, Ferdinand: ‘“Frankl’s Existential Psychol- 
ogy from the Viewpoint of Individual Psychology.” 
Journal of Individual Psychology, XVII (1961), 
162-6. 

Burck, James Lester: “The Relevance of Viktor 
Frankl’s ‘Will to Meaning’ for Preaching to Juve- 
nile Delinquents.” A Master of Theology thesis 
submitted to the Southern Baptist Theological 
Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky, 1966. 

Crumbaugh, James C.: “The Application of Logo- 
therapy.” Journal of Existentialism, V (1965), 
403-12. 

: “Experimental Studies in Existentialism: I. 

The Purpose-in-Life Test as a Measure of Frankl’s 

Nodgenic Neurosis” (delivered before Sec. 24 of 

Amer. Psychol. Assn. Annual Meeting in New 

York City, Sept. 1966). Newsletter for Research 

in Psychotherapy (Veterans Administration Cen- 

ter, Hampton, Virginia), VIII (4), 1966, 45 

(Summary). 

: “Cross Validation of Purpose-in-Life Test 
Based on Frankl’s Concepts.” Journal of Individual 
Psychology, XXIV (1968). 

Crumbaugh, James C., and Leonard T. Maholick: 
“The Case for Frankl’s ‘Will to Meaning.’ ” Journal 
of Existential Psychiatry TV (1963), 43-8. 

: “An Experimental Study in Existentialism: 
The Psychometric Approach to Frankl’s Concept 
of Nodgenic Neurosis.”* Journal of Clinical Psy- 
chology, XX (1964), 200-7. 

Duncan, Franklin D.: “Logotherapy and the Pastoral 
Care of Physically Disabled Persons.” A thesis in 
the Department of Psychology of Religion sub- 
mitted to the faculty of the Graduate School of 
Theology in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the degree of Master of Theology at Southern 
Baptist Theological Seminary, 1968. 


217 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Elmore, Thomas M., and Eugene D. Chambers: 
“Anomic, Existential Neurosis, and Personality: 
Relevance for Counseling,” in Proceedings of the 
75th Annual Convention, A(merican) P(sycho- 
logical) A(ssociation), 1967. 

Fabry, Joseph: “A Most Ingenious Paradox.” The 
Register-Leader of the Unitarian Universalist Asso- 
ciation, Vol. 149 (June 1967), 7-8. 

and Max Knight (pseud. Peter Fabrizius): 

“Viktor Frankl’s Logotherapy.” Delphian Quarter- 

ly, XLVI, No. 3 (1964), 27-30. 

: “The Use of Humor in Therapy.” Delphian 
Quarterly, XLVIII, No. 3 (1965), 22-36. 

Forstmeyer, Annemarie von: “The Will to Meaning 
as a Prerequisite for Self-Actualization.” A Thesis 
Presented to the Faculty of California Western 
University in Partial Fulfillment of the Require- 
ments for the Degree Master of Arts, 1968. 

Frankl, Viktor E.: “Logos and Existence in Psycho- 
therapy.” American Journal of Psychotherapy, VI 
(1953), 8-15. 

: “Group Psychotheapeutic Experiences in a 

Concentration Camp’”* (paper read before the 

Second International Congress of Psychotherapy, 

Leiden, Netherlands, Sept. 8, 1951). Group Psy- 

chotherapy, VII (1954), 81-90. 

: “The Concept of Man in Psychotherapy” 

(paper read before the Royal Society of Medicine, 

Section of Psychiatry, London, England, June 15, 

1954). Pastoral Psychology, VI (1955), 16-26. 

; “On Logotherapy and Existential Analysis” 

(paper read before the Association for the Ad- 

vancement of Psychoanalysis, New York, April 17, 

1957). American Journal of Psychoanalysis, XVI 

(1958), 28-37. 

: “Guest Editorial,” Academy Reporter, IU, 

No. 5 (May, 1958), 1-4. 

: “The Will to Meaning.” Journal of Pastoral 


Care, XII (1958), 82-8. 
218 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


: “The Search for Meaning.” Saturday Review, 

Sept. 13, 1958. 

: “The Spiritual Dimension in Existential Anal- 

ysis and Logotherapy”’* (paper read before the 

Fourth International Congress of Psychotherapy, 

Barcelona, Sept. 5, 1958). Journal of Individual 

Psychology, XV (1959), 157-65. 

: “Beyond Self-Actualization and Self-Expres- 

sion”* (paper read before the Conference on 

Existential Psychotherapy, Chicago, Dec. 13, 

1959). Journal of Existential Psychiatry, I (1960), 

5-20. 

: “Paradoxical Intention: A Logotherapeutic 

Technique”* (paper read before the American 

Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy, 

New York, Feb. 26, 1960). American Journal of 

Psychotherapy, XIV (1960), 520-35. 

: “Logotherapy and the Challenge of Suffer- 

ing”’* (paper read before the American Conference 

on Existential Psychotherapy, New York, Feb. 27, 

1960). Review of Existentian Psychology and Psy- 

chiatry, I (1961), 3-7. 

: “Religion and Existential Psychotherapy.” 

Gordon Review, VI (1961), 2-10. 

: “Dynamics, Existence and Values.”* Journal 

of Existential Psychiatry, II (1961), 5-16. 

: “Psychotherapy and Philosophy.” Philosophy 

Today, V (1961), 59-64. 

: “Basic Concepts of Logotherapy.” Journal of 

Existential Psychiatry, TIT (1961), 111-18. 

: “Psychiatry and Man’s Quest for Meaning.” 

Journal of Religion and Health, I (1961), 93-103. 

: “In Steady Search for Meaning.” Liberal 
Dimension, II, No. 2 (1964), 3-8. 

—____: “The Concept of Man in Logotherapy” 
(175th Anniversary Lecture, Georgetown Uni- 
versity, Washington, D.C., February 27, 1964). 
Journal of Existentialism, VI (1965), 53-58. 

: “Logotherapy and Existential Analysis: A 


Review” (paper read before the Symposium on 
219 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Logotherapy, 6th International Congress of Psy- 

chotherapy, London, August 26, 1964). American 

Journal of Psychotherapy, XX (1966), 252-60. 

: “Self-Transcendence As a Human Phenome- 

non.” Journal of Humanistic Psychology, Fall 

1966, 97-106. 

: “What is Meant by Meaning?” Journal of 

Existentialism, VII, No. 25 (Fall 1966), 21-28. 

: “Time and Responsibility.” Existential Psy- 
chiatry, I (1966), 361-6. 

—_____: “Logotherapy and Existentialism.” Psycho- 
therapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 1V, No. 3 
(Aug. 1967), 138-42. 

____: “What is a Man?” Life Association News, 
LXII, No. 9 (Sept. 1967), 151-57. 

: “Experiences in a Concentration Camp.” 

Jewish Heritage, XI (1968), 5-7. 

: “The Search for Meaning” (abstract from a 

series of lectures given at the Brandeis Institute in 

California). Jewish Heritage, XI (1968), 8-11. 

: “Eternity Is the Here and Now.” Pace, V, No. 

4 (April 1969), 2. 

: “Logotherapy.” Israel Annals of Psychiatry 
and Related Disciplines, VII (1967), 142-55. 

Gerz, Hans O.: “The Treatment of the Phobic and 
the Obsessive-Compulsive Patient Using Paradoxi- 
cal Intention sec. Viktor E. Frankl.”* Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry, TI, No. 6 (July—Aug. 1962), 
375-87. 

: “Experience with the Logotherapeutic Tech- 

nique of Paradoxical Intention in the Treatment of 

Phobic and Obsessive-Compulsive Patients” (pa- 

per read at the Symposium of Logotherapy at the 

6th International Congress of Psychotherapy, Lon- 
don, England, August 1964). American Journal 

of Psychiatry, CXXIII, No. 5 (Nov. 1966), 548—- 

33. 


—____: “Reply.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 
CXXIII, No. 10 (April 1967), 1306, 
Grollman, Earl A.: “Viktor E. Frankl: A Bridge 


220 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Between Psychiatry and Religion.” Conservative 

Judaism, XYX, No. 1 (Fall 1964), 19-23. 

: “The Logotherapy of Viktor E. Frankl.” 
Judaism, XIV (1965), 22-38. 

Grossman, Nathan: ‘‘The Rabbi and the Doctor of 
the Soul.” Jewish Spectator, Vol. XXXIV (Jan- 
uary, 1969), No. 1, pp. 8-12. 

Hall, Mary Harrington: “A Conversation with Viktor 
Frankl of Vienna.” Psychology Today, I, No. 9 
(Feb. 1968), 56-63. 

Harrington, Donald Szantho: “The View from the 
Existential Vacuum.” Academy Reporter, IX, No. 
9 (Dec. 1964), 1-4. 

Havens, Leston L.: “Paradoxical Intention.” Psy- 
chiatry & Social Science Review, II (1968), 16—- 
19. 

Haworth, D. Swan: “Viktor Frankl.” Judaism, XIV 
(1965), 351-2. 

Johnson, Paul E.: “Logotherapy: A Corrective for 
Determinism.” Christian Advocate, V (Nov. 23, 
1961), 12-13. 

____: “Meet Doctor Frankl.” Adult Student, XXIV 
(Oct. 1964), 8-10. 

——__: “The Meaning of Logotherapy.” Adult Stu- 
dent, XXVI (8) (Apr. 1967), 4-5. 

> “Do We Need a New Psychology?” Adult 

Student, XXVI (11) (July 1967), 3-4. 

: “The Challenge of Logotherapy.” Journal of 
Religion and Health, VII (1968), 122-130. 

Harrington, Donald Szantho: “The View from the 
Existential Vacuum.” Academy Reporter, IX, No. 
9 (Dec. 1964), 1-4. 

Haworth, D. Swan: “Viktor Frankl.” Judaism, XIV 
(1965), 351-2. 

Johnson, Paul E.: “Logotherapy: A Corrective for 
Determinism.” Christian Advocate, V (Nov. 23, 
1961), 12-13. 

Jones, Elbert Whaley: “Nietzsche and Existential- 
Analysis.” A dissertation in the Department of 
Philosophy submitted to the faculty of the Graduate 


221 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


School of Arts and Science in partial fulfillment of 
the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts 
at New York University 1967. 

Kaczanowski, Godfryd: ‘“Frankl’s Logotherapy.” 
American Journal of Psychiatry, CXVII (1960), 
563. 

—___: “Logotherapy—A New Psychotherapeutic 
Tool.” Psychosomatics, Vol. 8 (May-June 1967), 
158-161. 

Kasukegawa, Tsugio: ““A Comparative Study of the 
Differences between Christian Existence and Secu- 
lar Existence, and of Their Existential Frustration.” 
Japanese Journal of Educational and Social Psy- 
chology, VII, 2 (1968), 195-208. 

Leslie, Robert C.: “Viktor E. Frankl’s New Concept 
of Man.” Motive, XXII (1962), 16-19. 

Maholick, Leonard T.: “ ... to Comfort Always.” 
Journal of the Medical Association of Georgia, L 
(1961), 559-60. 

Maslow, A. H.: “Comments on Dr. Frankl’s Paper.” 
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, VI (1966), 
107-12. 

Miiller-Hegemann, D.: “Methodological Approaches 
in Psychotherapy: Current Concepts in East Ger- 
many.” American Journal of Psychotherapy, XVII 
(1963), 554-68. 

Pervin, Lawrence A.: “Existentialism, Psychology, 
and Psychotherapy.” American Psychologist, XV 
(1960), 305-9, 

Polak, Paul: “Frankl’s Existential Analysis.” Ameri- 
can Journal of Psychotherapy, III (1949), 517- 
22. 

Rowland, Stanley J., Jr.: “Viktor Frankl and the Will 
to Meaning.” Christian Century, LX XIX (June 6, 
1962), 722-4. 

Schachter, Stanley J: “Bettelheim and Frankl: Con- 
tradicting Views of the Holocaust.” Reconstruc- 
tionist, XXVI, No. 20 (Feb. 10, 1961), 6-11. 

“That Nothing Feeling.” Time Magazine (June 1, 
1962), p. 48. 


Zee 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


“The Doctor and the Soul. Dr. Viktor Frankl.” Har- 
vard Medical Alumni Bulletin, XXXVI, No. 1 
(Fall 1961), 8. 

“The Father of Logotherapy.” Existential Psychiatry, 
Vol. 1 (1967), 439. 

Turner, R. H.: “Comment on Dr. Frankl’s Paper.” 
Journal of Existential Psychiatry, I (1960), 21- 
23. 

“Viktor Frankl.” The Colby Alumnus, LI, (Spring 
1962), 5. 

Waugh, Robert J. L.: “Paradoxical Intention.” 
American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 123, No. 10 
(April 1967), 1305-6. 

Weiss, M. David: “Frankl’s Approach to the Men- 
tally Il.” Association of Mental Hospital Chap- 
lains’ Newsletter, (Fall 1962), 39-42. 

Weisskopf-Joelson, Edith: “Some Comments on a 
Viennese School of Psychiatry,” Journal of Ab- 
normal and Social Psychology, LI (1955), 701-3. 

: “Logotherapy and Existential Analysis.” Acta 

Psychotherapeutica, VI (1958), 193-204. 

: “Paranoia and the Will-to-Meaning.” Exis- 
tential Psychiatry, I (1966), 316-20. 

Wirth, Arthur G.: “A Search for Meaning.” Improv- 
ing College and University Teaching, 1961, 155-9. 


4. Films, Records, and Tapes 


Frankl, Viktor E., “Logotherapy,” a film produced 
by the Department of Psychiatry, Neurology, and 
Behavioral Sciences, University of Oklahoma 
Medical School. 

: “Some Clinical Aspects of Logotherapy. Paper 

read before the Anderson County Medical Society 

in South Carolina,” “Man in Search for Meaning. 

Address given to the Annual Meeting of the Ander- 

son County Mental Health Association in South 

Carolina,” and ‘“Man’s Search for Ultimate Mean- 


225 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ing. Lecture given at the Peachtree Church in At- 
lanta, Georgia,” videotapes cleared for television 
upon request from WGTV, the University of 
Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30601. 


: Three Lectures on Logotherapy, given at the 
Brandeis Institute, Brandeis, California. Long- 
playing records. 


: “Education and the Search for Meaning. An 
Interview by Professor William Blair Gould of 
Bradley University,” a videotape produced by 
Bradley University Television. Available by request 
from Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois 61606. 
($25.00 handling charges for usage.) 


: “Youth in Search for Meaning. The Third 
Paul Dana Bartlett Memorial Lecture,” a video- 
tape produced by KNBU and cleared for television 
upon request from President James Edward Doty, 
Baker University, Baldwin City, Kansas 66006. 


: “Man in Search of Meaning” and “Youth in 
Search of Meaning,” tapes produced by Sound 
Seminars, Recorded Lectures for Colleges and 
Universities, Cincinnati, Ohio. 


Frankl, Viktor E., and Huston Smith, “Value Dimen- 
sions in Teaching,” a color television film produced 
by Hollywood Animators, Inc., for the California 
Junior College Association. Rental or purchase 
through Dr. Rex Wignall, Director, Chaffey Col- 
lege, Alta Loma, California. 


Hale, Dr. William H., “An Interview with Viktor E. 
Frankl. With an Introduction by Dr Edith Weiss- 
kopf-Joelson, Professor of Psychology at the Uni- 
versity of Georgia,” a videotape cleared for tele- 
vision upon request from WGTYV, the University of 
Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30601. 


224 